Anarchy is a form of society without rulers. It is primarily advocated by anarchists who propose replacing the state with a stateless society based on voluntary free association. These institutions or free associations are generally modeled to represent concepts such as community and economic self-reliance, interdependence, or individualism. In simple terms anarchy means 'without rulers' or 'without authority'. As such, under anarchy there is no coercive rule by a single group or individual, rather instead by an individual upon themselves or by the people entirely. 
 As a concept, anarchy is commonly defined by what it excludes.[1] Etymologically, anarchy is derived from the Greek: αναρχία, romanized: anarkhia; where "αν" ("an") means "without" and "αρχία" ("arkhia") means "ruler".[2] Therefore, anarchy is fundamentally defined by the absence of rulers.[3]
 While anarchy specifically represents a society without rulers, it can more generally refer to a stateless society,[4] or a society without government.[5] Anarchy is thus defined in direct contrast to the State,[6] an institution that claims a monopoly on violence over a given territory.[7] Anarchists such as Errico Malatesta have also defined anarchy more precisely as a society without authority,[8] or hierarchy.[9]
 Anarchy is also often defined synonymously as chaos or social disorder,[10] reflecting the state of nature as depicted by Thomas Hobbes.[11] By this definition, anarchy represents not only an absence of government but also an absence of governance. This connection of anarchy with chaos usually assumes that, without government, no means of governance exist and thus that disorder is an unavoidable outcome of anarchy.[12] Sociologist Francis Dupuis-Déri has described chaos as a "degenerate form of anarchy", in which there is an absence, not just of rulers, but of any kind of political organization.[13] He contrasts the "rule of all" under anarchy with the "rule of none" under chaos.[14]
 Since its conception, anarchy has been used in both a positive and negative sense, respectively describing a free society without coercion or a state of chaos.[15]
 Peter Leeson examined a variety of institutions of private law enforcement developed in anarchic situations by eighteenth century pirates, preliterate tribesmen, and Californian prison gangs. These groups all adapted different methods of private law enforcement to meet their specific needs and the particulars of their anarchic situation.[16]
 In international relations, anarchy is "the absence of any authority superior to nation-states and capable of arbitrating their disputes and enforcing international law".[17][18]
 As a political philosophy, anarchism advocates self-governed societies based on voluntary institutions. These are often described as stateless societies,[19][20][21] although several authors have defined them more specifically as institutions based on non-hierarchical free associations.[22] Anarchism holds the state to be undesirable, unnecessary, or harmful.[20][23] While opposition to the state is central, it is a necessary but not sufficient condition.[24][25] Anarchism also entails opposing unnecessary authority or hierarchical organisation in the conduct of all human relations, including yet not limited to the state system.[26][27][28]
 The German philosopher Immanuel Kant treated anarchy in his Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View as consisting of "Law and Freedom without Force". For Kant, anarchy falls short of being a true civil state because the law is only an "empty recommendation" if force is not included to make this law efficacious. For there to be such a state, force must be included while law and freedom are maintained, a state which Kant calls a republic. Kant identified four kinds of government:[29]

 Sons of Anarchy is an American action crime drama television series created by Kurt Sutter for FX. Originally aired from October 3, 2008, to December 9, 2014, Sons of Anarchy follows the lives of a close-knit outlaw motorcycle club operating in Charming, a fictional town in California's Central Valley. Charlie Hunnam stars as Jackson "Jax" Teller, who is initially the vice president and subsequently the president of the club. After discovering a manifesto written by his late father, John, who previously led the club, he begins to question himself, his relationships, and the club. Themes throughout the show include love, brotherhood, loyalty, betrayal and redemption. It explored vigilantism, government corruption and racism. The show's plot depicted an outlaw motorcycle club as an analogy for human transformation. David Labrava, a real-life member of the Oakland chapter of Hells Angels, served as a technical adviser, and also played the recurring character Happy Lowman, the club's assassin.
 Sons of Anarchy had the third season attract an average of 4.9 million weekly viewers, becoming FX's highest-rated series at the time and surpassing its other hits The Shield, Nip/Tuck and Rescue Me. The season 4 and 5 premieres were the two highest-rated telecasts in FX's history.[4] The sixth season aired from September 10, 2013, through December 10, 2013. The seventh season of the series premiered on September 9, 2014. On November 3, 2014, FX announced that the seventh season would be its last. The series finale aired on December 9, 2014.[5][6]
 In November 2016, FX announced the development of a spin-off series, Mayans M.C., that was broadcast from 2018 to 2023.[7][8]
 Each season involved parallel plot lines that intertwine and overlap, centering on both the personal and family life of Jackson "Jax" Teller (Charlie Hunnam) and on SAMCRO (Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club, Redwood Original), the "Mother Chapter" of the organization based in Charming, California. SAMCRO is involved with gun-running in the western United States, and deals with rival gangs, politicians and the authorities. As vice president and later president of SAMCRO, Jax struggles to manage the club and the legacy of its founder, his late father John Teller. He is frequently at odds with his stepfather, Clay Morrow, who has taken over the club since John's death, and is also now married to Jax's mother and John's widow, Gemma Teller Morrow. Jax also grapples with his relationships with his high school sweetheart, Tara Knowles, and his childhood best friend, Opie Winston.
 SAMCRO takes its inspiration from the Hells Angels Motorcycle Club; the series includes special guest appearances by David Labrava (Happy), Chuck Zito (Frankie Diamonds), Rusty Coones (Quinn), and Sonny Barger (Lenny "The Pimp" Janowitz) who are real Hells Angels members.[9]
 The series begins with the destruction of a warehouse the club uses to store and assemble guns, which is their main source of income, by a rival club right before the overdose of Jax's heroin addicted ex-wife Wendy. An emergency C-section is performed, and their son Abel is delivered ten weeks prematurely. Jax finds his father's memoirs when he visits a storage unit to collect some old baby clothes. John Teller, Jax's father, was one of the founders of SAMCRO, and the book describes his trials with and hopes for the club. Jax's mother, Gemma Teller-Morrow, is now married to the president of SAMCRO, Clay Morrow. Jax's best friend Opie has just been released from prison for serving time for a club-related crime. The first season deals with Jax trying to reconcile things happening to the club with what he reads in his father's memoirs, Opie trying to take a lesser role in the club, and local and federal law enforcement trying to shut down SAMCRO.
 White separatists called the League of American Nationalists (LOAN) arrive in Charming.[10] LOAN's leader Ethan Zobelle and Zobelle's enforcer, A.J. Weston, seek to drive the Sons of Anarchy from Charming. To send a message to SAMCRO, Zobelle orchestrates to have Gemma kidnapped and gang raped by Weston and two others. Due to the improper handling of an internal problem, the rift between Clay and Jax continues to widen as Jax challenges most of Clay's decisions and comes to a head when a lone car bomb nearly kills another member of SAMCRO. The second season sees SAMCRO battling LOAN for control of Charming, Jax and Clay veering further apart in their individual visions for the club, and evading the ever-present threat of the ATF.
 Gemma has been hiding in Rogue River, Oregon, with Tig at the home of Gemma's father, Nate (Hal Holbrook), who suffers from dementia. Gemma struggles when she takes Nate to his new assisted living home, and he pleads to be taken back to his house. She returns to Charming to reunite with her grandson, unaware he has been kidnapped. The return of A.T.F. agent Stahl twists the facts about the murder of Donna, Stahl attempts to make a deal with Jax behind the club's back. Father Kellan Ashby's sister, Maureen, contacts Gemma at Ashby's request and tells her Abel is safe in Belfast. Upon learning of her grandson's abduction, Gemma suffers a cardiac arrhythmia and collapses in the Teller-Morrow lot. After the club returns from Northern Ireland and brings home Abel, agent Stahl double crosses Jax and tells the club about the side deal Jax made with her, unaware that Jax and the club had it planned all along knowing Stahl would back out of the deal. Jax, Clay, Bobby, Tig, Juice and Happy are hauled away to jail. While Opie, Chibs, and the Prospects are all en route following Stahl. Opie kills Stahl to avenge the death of his wife, Donna.
 The imprisoned SAMCRO members leave the penitentiary after their 14-month stay and are met by Lieutenant Eli Roosevelt of the San Joaquin Sheriff's Department, the new law enforcement presence in Charming. They also discover that Sheriff Hale's brother has become the mayor. US Attorney Lincoln Potter seeks Lieutenant Roosevelt's help to build a RICO case against SAMCRO.
 In retaliation for the death of Veronica Pope (Laroy's girlfriend, who was also the daughter of powerful Oakland kingpin Damon Pope), the Niners attack SAMCRO and ambush a cargo shipment. With the death of Piney Winston and the growing conflict between the Niners and SAMCRO, along with several home invasions targeting people linked to the club, Jax is forced to meet with Damon Pope, to deal with a new threat unlike anything SAMCRO has ever faced.
 Following the arrest of Tara and Clay, Jax struggles to hold SAMCRO together while Tara is imprisoned. Toric approaches both Tara and Clay and offers them deals in exchange for giving up SAMCRO; both initially refuse, but Clay later relents when confronted with being thrown into the prison's general population and assuredly being killed by inmates paid off by Damon Pope's men as a retaliation for Pope's murder. Juice returns to Charming after helping Bobby relocate after stepping down as VP, which angers Chibs, who doesn't believe Juice has been punished enough for talking to cops and later beats him. With the death of Clay, Gemma and Nero's romance becomes stronger. Tara is murdered and the tables get turned for the club.
 Jax struggles with his recent loss and turns himself in to the authorities. While in jail, Jax makes decisions that radically alter the direction of the club and uses it to exact revenge for the death of his wife. With Bobby's death in the ensuing war, the hate and lies are fuelled, created by Gemma and Juice, who are on the run and hiding from the club. After Jax learns the truth, he works to make things right with all parties involved. The series ends with Jax making the ultimate sacrifice to complete his part of the story of SAMCRO and fulfill his father's vision.
 Sons of Anarchy is the story of the Teller-Morrow family of Charming, California, as well as the other members of Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club, Redwood Original (SAMCRO), their families, various Charming townspeople, allied and rival gangs, associates, and law agencies that undermine or support SAMCRO's legal and illegal enterprises.
 The series begins with SAMCRO being led by club president Clay Morrow, his stepson Jax Teller as vice president, Tig Trager as Sergeant-At-Arms, Bobby Munson as Secretary/Treasurer, and Juice Ortiz as their intelligence officer. Other members rounding out the club were Chibs Telford, formerly of SAM-Belfast, Opie Winston, the son of First 9 member and SAMCRO advisor Piney Winston, and Half-Sack Epps, the charter's prospect. They often cross paths with Deputy Sheriff Hale, a classmate of Jax's who grew up on the other side of the law, and his boss, Sheriff Unser, who is on the club's payroll. Jax, a new father, deals with his ex-wife Wendy Case and is reunited with his high school sweetheart, Tara Knowles, while Opie tries to return to a life of normalcy for his long-suffering wife Donna Winston.
 The Sons of Anarchy (SOA) is an outlaw motorcycle club with many charters in the United States as well as overseas. The show focused on the original and founding ("mother") charter, Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club, Redwood Original,[12] often referred to by the acronym SAMCRO, Sam Crow, or simply "Redwood".[13]  SAMCRO is located in San Joaquin County, California, in the fictional town of Charming, which appears to be near Stockton. Its nickname is reflected in the original title for the show, Forever Sam Crow.[14] SAMCRO attempts to control and protect Charming through close community relationships, bribery, and violent intimidation. They are vehement about keeping "hard" drugs and drug dealers out of Charming; they also attempt to keep the peace between the various racially-divided gangs located in nearby cities.
 High school friends John Teller and Piermont "Piney" Winston co-founded SAMCRO in 1967 upon returning from the Vietnam War.[15] After the birth of John's sons with his wife, Gemma, they settle in her hometown of Charming. Six of the "Redwood Original 9" or "First 9" members were Vietnam veterans, with only Lenny Janowitz, the club's third member and original Sergeant-at-Arms, alive at the end of the series. The other First 9 included Chico Villanueva, Otto Moran, Wally Grazer, Thomas Whitney, Clay Morrow, and Keith McGee.
 Club members wear denim or leather vests known as cuts with a three-piece patch on the back that includes the club's name, logo, and territorial location. The SOA logo is a traditional Grim Reaper holding a crystal ball with the anarchist circle-A symbol, and wielding the Reaper's traditional scythe, the handle of which has been replaced by the M16 rifle. Only full members can wear the "full patch", and many of them also have it tattooed on their backs or aspects of it on their arms. Other smaller patches, called flashes, have specific meanings, such as "Men of Mayhem", which is worn by club members who have spilled blood on the club's behalf; "First 9", worn by the original nine members; and rank flashes for the club officers.[16]
 Whenever conducting club business, the members always wear their cuts; one notable exception to this is during the course of season 4, when a number of SAMCRO members are on parole and must cover their cuts in public to avoid identifying as members.
 Female characters—such as Tara, Ima, and Lyla—are seen wearing t-shirts that sport the name Sons of Anarchy or SAMCRO, but nobody outside of the club wears cuts or is seen wearing clothing with the symbol or Reaper image.
 Some of the show's clothing was created by LA company Victorious 22.[17]
 SAMCRO rides customized Harley-Davidson Dyna motorcycles. Each rider customizes his own bike to his individual style; however, they all paint their bikes black and most sport T-bar style handlebars. A member's bike usually sports graphics such as the Sons of Anarchy letters, the club's Grim Reaper logo, or the circled "A" club logo. In later seasons, several members switch to more touring-oriented models. During the final season, Jax refurbishes and rides his father's 1946 Harley-Davidson Customized EL Knucklehead.[18]
 Some members have day jobs in local industries; most work at the Teller-Morrow garage as mechanics and assist at the club's other business ventures, such as running security or accounting at the porn studios. They primarily make money by illegally importing firearms and selling them to various gangs, and making protection runs for local businesses by defending valuable truck shipments against hijacking. During Season 4 they start to mule cocaine for the Galindo cartel in exchange for cash and protection. Throughout the series, they also manage porn studios and an escort business in an attempt to earn legitimately.
 SAMCRO keeps meth traffickers and drug dealers out of Charming, which puts them at odds with the meth-distributing white supremacist Nordics (Nords), headed by Ernest Darby. This earns them respect and admiration from the townspeople, who believe the Sons do more to protect their town than its own police. SAMCRO also has to deal with a rival, Oakland-based motorcycle club Mayans led by Marcus Alvarez. Other groups in SAMCRO's orbit include the Oakland–based Chinese mafia Lin Triad, led by Henry Lin; the Italian American Cacuzza crime family; the Russian mob led by Viktor Putlova; the Real IRA (aka RIRA) of Northern Ireland, which supplies them with illegal Russian-made guns; the "One-Niners", an African American street gang to whom SAMCRO sell weapons; and various affiliates in the state prison system, where many members of the club have been incarcerated at one time or another.
 In the series premiere, the Mayans torch the facility the SAMCRO used for storing and assembling guns, forcing the club to buy land for and build another facility. The Clubhouse is located on the "compound" that includes the Teller-Morrow mechanic shop. The Clubhouse itself includes a living area with multiple apartments, a fully operational bar, a pool table, a kitchen; a workout room; and the "Chapel", the SAMCRO meeting room with an elaborate redwood conference table that has the club logo carved into the top, where the members meet to discuss club business and vote on major decisions. The club owns a secluded cabin in the woods that is often Piney's retreat, and various warehouses outside of town. The club also rented an old soda fountain/candy shop that is used as the clubhouse in seasons 6 and 7 after the Teller-Morrow shop and original clubhouse were destroyed in an explosion. They also owned the warehouses out of which they ran their porn studios Cara Cara and Red Woody, and Diosa and Diosa Norte, the club's two escort agencies.
 Sons of Anarchy has been called "Hamlet on Harleys".[19] Similar to Hamlet, Jax's father was usurped by his father's SAMCRO "brother", who then married Jax's mother. Jax's murder of the innocent Jury in season 7 mirrors Hamlet's murder of the innocent Polonius in that it ultimately leads to his downfall.
 Sutter has said of the Shakespeare element, "I don't want to overplay that but it's there. It was Jax's father who started the club, so he's the ghost in the action. You wonder what he would have made of the way it turned out. It's not a version of Hamlet but it's definitely influenced by it."[20] Ron Perlman believed they were "going to stick to the structure of Hamlet all the way to the end (of the series)."[21]
 Numerous episode titles refer to Hamlet including:
 In the Season 1 premiere, Gemma is shown cleaning Jax's house, and he notes that she is always cleaning. This behavior, combined with her ambitions and (sometimes murderous) machinations, have prompted some reviewers and commentators to liken her to Lady Macbeth.[22][23]
 The series was created by Kurt Sutter. Sutter was also the showrunner, the series' most prolific writer, and a regular director; he directed each season finale. Sutter had previously worked as an executive producer for the FX series The Shield. The Sons of Anarchy's other executive producers are father and son team Art Linson and John Linson; Jim Parriott served as an executive producer and writer for the first season only.
 Paris Barclay joined Sons of Anarchy as an executive producer in the fourth season, after directing episodes in the first and second season. In addition to serving as Executive Producer in the fourth, fifth, and sixth seasons, Barclay directed three episodes each season, including the season 4 and 5 premieres, the top two highest-rated telecasts in the history of FX.[4]
 Jack LoGiudice served as a consulting producer and regular writer for the first season. He became co-executive producer for the second season, then left the series to work on The Walking Dead.
 Dave Erickson also worked as a consulting producer for the first and second seasons, and then took over as co-executive producer for the third season. The series' other regular writers are supervising producer Chris Collins and co-producer Regina Corrado. Shawn Rutherford joined as consulting producer for seasons 6 and 7.
 Sutter drew regular directors from The Shield including Stephen Kay, Gwyneth Horder-Payton, Guy Ferland, and Billy Gierhart.
 Although Sons of Anarchy is set in Northern California's Central Valley (with some scenes in the Bay Area), it was filmed primarily at Occidental Studios Stage 5A in North Hollywood. Main sets located there included the clubhouse, St. Thomas Hospital, and Jax's house. The production rooms at the studio used by the writing staff doubled as the Charming police station. External scenes were often filmed nearby in Sun Valley, Acton, California, and Tujunga.[24] Interior and exterior scenes set in Northern Ireland during season 3 were also filmed at Occidental Studios and surrounding areas. A second unit shot footage in Northern Ireland used in the third season.[25]
 Sons of Anarchy received very favorable reviews over the course of its run, with many singling out Katey Sagal's performance. On the review aggregator website Metacritic, the first season scored 68/100, the second season scored 86/100, the third season scored 84/100, the fourth season scored 81/100, the fifth season scored 72/100, the sixth season scored 74/100 and the final season scored 68/100.[30][31][32][33]
 In 2013, a collection of essays on the series was published.[37]
 The first season received positive reviews from industry critics. It scored a 68 on Metacritic, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[30] Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe said the first season had "real potential".[38] The New York Times' Gina Bellafante spoke highly of the cast's acting ability, particularly Sagal's portrayal of Gemma. Brian Lowry of Variety gave a mixed review, admiring Sutter's creation of the club and the town of Charming but observing the early episodes lacked direction.[39]
 The second season saw a substantial increase in positive reviews. Writing for Chicago Tribune, Maureen Ryan called the second season "engrossing". She elaborated that "the pacing is better [and] the plotting is tighter" and commends Sagal and Perlman for their performances.[40] Variety's Stuart Levine stated that the new season was "compelling"; he also complimented the acting skill of Perlman, Sagal, Hunnam and Siff.[41] James Poniewozik of TIME called Sagal's performance "devastatingly powerful" and named the series on his list of Top 10 Shows of 2009.[42] In Alan Sepinwall's 2016 book titled TV (The Book), which he co-wrote with Matt Zoller Seitz, he included the second season of Sons of Anarchy in the section "A Certain Regard" where he praised how "[a]fter working out a few kinks in the first season, Sutter nailed everything in season 2".[43]
 Some critics felt the third season was dragged down by the previous season's cliffhanger.[44][45] James Poniewozik of TIME called the season three premiere "breathtaking" and praised Sagal's performance with Holbrook.[46] He later stated that Abel's disappearance helped return the show to its central problem: Jax's allegiance to the club.[47] Entertainment Weekly's Ken Tucker agreed that Holbrook and Sagal's scenes were "beautiful". He also commented that the series handled themes of loyalty and family especially well.[48] Maureen Ryan commented that the third season divided critics and fans alike, suggesting the expanded Belfast cast made it harder for the audience to invest in the characters' journeys.[49] Ryan later questioned the credibility of Hector Salazar's story, noting that he was inferior to other villainous characters such as Stahl, Zobelle and Weston. However, she praised Ally Walker's performance, comparing her character to The Shield's Vic Mackey.[50] Critic Alan Sepinwall said the season was "interesting but uneven", noting that the plot gained traction in later episodes.[51][52] Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter said "Sutter should be applauded for shaking things up", calling the slower pace a "creative necessity".[53]
 Alan Sepinwall stated that the fourth season risked predictability by returning to a successful formula of storytelling, but he nonetheless preferred those episodes to those of season three.[54] Maureen Ryan reviewed the fourth season positively. She praised the addition of Lincoln Potter (played by Ray McKinnon), comparing the character's quality to that of Breaking Bad's antagonist, Gustavo Fring.[55] The A.V. Club called the fourth season more "focused" and "operatic". A.V. Club reviewer Zack Handlen was fond of the season but felt disappointed with the finale, saying it featured a "lousy case of dictated convenience, of an arbitrary and unbelievable reveal used to shift characters around to where the writers want them to be for next season, as opposed to where they might land organically." However, the review did praise Charlie Hunnam's performance in the finale.[56][57] TIME said the fourth season was the strongest since season two, but the show needed to end sooner rather than later. TIME also agreed that the finale's contrivances were sometimes too visible, stating "it's the principle: you can only turn up alive at your own funeral so many times before it starts to lose its impact."[58]
 Season five received favorable reviews and has a rating of 72 on Metacritic.[34]
Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly praised the series by calling it a "richly detailed portrait of self-righteous villainy".[citation needed]
 Season six received generally favorable reviews and scored a 74 out of 100 on Metacritic.[citation needed]
 Season seven received "generally favorable reviews" and scored a 68 out of 100 on Metacritic based on reviews from 6 critics.[36]
 The seventh season's premiere on September 9, 2014, received the highest ratings in the series' history. The episode was watched by 6.20 million viewers.
 
 Three EP soundtracks have been released by 20th Century Fox Records, on iTunes, featuring songs from each series. The first five-song EP, entitled Sons of Anarchy: North Country – EP, was released on September 8, 2009, and featured the full version of the Emmy Award nominated[85] theme song "This Life".[86] A second five-song EP, entitled Sons of Anarchy: Shelter – EP, was released on November 24, 2009, while a third six-song EP, entitled Sons of Anarchy: The King is Gone - EP, was released on November 23, 2010.
 In November 2011, selected highlights from the EPs and new tracks were released in Songs of Anarchy: Music from Sons of Anarchy Seasons 1–4, followed up by Sons of Anarchy: Songs of Anarchy Vol. 2 released in November 2012, Sons of Anarchy: Songs of Anarchy Vol. 3 released in December 2013, and Sons of Anarchy: Songs of Anarchy Vol. 4 released in February 2015.
 Katey Sagal, who played Gemma Teller Morrow on the show, recorded two songs for the soundtracks.
 In 2013, Boom! Studios began publishing a Sons of Anarchy comic book. As of September 2015, 25 issues have been published.[87] Issue 25 is the final issue. A new comic book prequel, Sons of Anarchy: Redwood Original, was released on August 3, 2016.
 The comic series were published as Legacy Edition Collections as well: Sons of Anarchy Legacy Edition Book One,[88]  Sons of Anarchy Legacy Edition Book Two,[89] Sons of Anarchy Legacy Edition Book Three.[90]
 Sons of Anarchy: Bratva, the first in a planned series of SOA novels to be written by Christopher Golden, was published in 2014.[91]
 A prequel series, detailing the origin of the club, is planned. Sutter stated in an August 2014 interview that the prequel would focus on the "First 9" members of the club and be set around the time of the Vietnam War. He added that the prequel would likely consist of a miniseries or "maybe 10 episodes or two 8 episode seasons". At the conclusion of the prequel, Sutter plans to release John Teller's manuscript, titled The Life and Death of SAMCRO.[92] However, the prequel is in limbo after some problems between Sutter and Disney arose.[93] Sutter was quoted saying that the possibility of making the First 9 "doesn't look that hopeful" since he was fired from FX and the studio owns Sons of Anarchy.[94]
 Sons of Anarchy: The Prospect was an episodic adventure video game developed by Silverback Games and published by Orpheus Interactive.[95][96] The game was originally slated to have ten episodes and to be released on Microsoft Windows, OS X, iOS, and Android.[97] The first episode was released on February 1, 2015, for iOS only, and was met with mixed reviews.[98] It has not seen an update since, and, although a season pass is being offered, no further episode was ever released.[99] On April 7, 2016, refunds were issued to everyone who purchased the game or the season pass, and the game had been removed from the App Store.[96]
 Despite the apparent cancellation and refunds, the game's publisher has not officially said anything about the development state of the nine unreleased episodes. Silverback Games has distanced themselves from the project, claiming to be "just a consultant" and having no knowledge of the state of the game or of Orpheus Interactive.[100]
 As of May 11, 2016, a spin-off series was in the works titled Mayans M.C..[101] The pilot began shooting in March 2017, directed by Sutter from a script he co-wrote with Elgin James.[102]
 Mayans M.C. takes place two and a half years after the events of Sons of Anarchy and is set hundreds of miles away in the fictional California border town of Santo Padre.[103] The series focuses on the struggles of Ezekiel "EZ" Reyes (portrayed by J. D. Pardo), a prospect in Mayans Motorcycle Club charter based on the U.S.-Mexico border who eventually works his way up to president of the chapter. EZ is the gifted son of a proud Mexican family, whose American dream was snuffed out by cartel violence.[104] On February 13, 2017, Edward James Olmos was attached to star as EZ's father Felipe Reyes, the family's once strong Mexican patriarch.[105] Several aspects from Sons of Anarchy are included in the show, including the Sons of Anarchy themselves, as well as the Galindo Cartel, who plays a larger role in the series. The series features appearances from characters from Sons of Anarchy, including Marcus Álvarez (Emilio Rivera), Happy Lowman (David Labrava), an uncredited appearance in the pilot from Katey Sagal portraying Gemma Teller, Lincoln Potter (Ray McKinnon), among a few others.
 On January 5, 2018, FX picked up the series with an order of 10 episodes, which premiered on September 4, 2018.[106] On October 1, 2018, it was announced that FX had renewed the series for a second season.[107]
 Season 4 premiered on April 19, 2022. Season 5 was confirmed and renewed by FX in July 2022. The series would conclude after season 5, airing its final episode on July 19, 2023.[108]
 Sons of Anarchy premiered in Australia, on the Showcase in 2009. In New Zealand, it appeared on TV3 on October 20, 2010, and, it has been announced, it is moving to the Box. In the UK, the show premiered on Bravo in 2009, but the channel only showed the first 2 series before it closed in 2011. It aired in its entirety on Spike in 2015.[109] In the Republic of Ireland, the show aired on RTÉ Two from 2009. In Canada, it premiered on Super Channel on October 20, 2008. In India, season 6 began airing on Star World Premiere on September 26, 2013.
 In 2018, Universo announced an October 29, 2018, premiere of Sons of Anarchy season 3 in Spanish. The show was made available on Netflix in 2011, but all seasons were removed from Netflix on December 1, 2018.[110]
 As of 2021, the show is available to watch in some countries on Disney+'s Star section and available on Hulu.
 The show also reran on AT&T's now defunct Audience Network.

 Sons of Anarchy, a television drama series created by Kurt Sutter, premiered on September 3, 2008 on the cable network FX in the United States. The series concluded on December 9, 2014,[1] after 92 episodes broadcast over seven seasons.
 Sons of Anarchy tells the story of an outlaw motorcycle club based in the fictional small town of Charming, California. The show follows protagonist Jackson "Jax" Teller (Charlie Hunnam), son of the deceased founding president John Teller, who begins questioning the club and the direction in which they should be heading.

 The Anarchy was a civil war in England and Normandy between 1138 and 1153, which resulted in a widespread breakdown in law and order. The conflict was a war of succession precipitated by the accidental death of William Adelin (the only legitimate son of King Henry I) who drowned in the White Ship disaster of 1120. Henry sought to be succeeded by his daughter, known as Empress Matilda, but was only partially successful in convincing the nobility to support her. On Henry's death in 1135, his nephew Stephen of Blois seized the throne, with the help of Stephen's brother Henry of Blois, who was the bishop of Winchester. Stephen's early reign saw fierce fighting with disloyal English barons, rebellious Welsh leaders, and Scottish invaders. Following a major rebellion in the south-west of England, Matilda invaded in 1139 with the help of her half-brother Robert of Gloucester.
 In the initial years of civil war, neither side was able to achieve a decisive advantage; the Empress came to control the south-west of England and much of the Thames Valley, while Stephen remained in control of the south-east. Much of the rest of the country was held by barons who refused to support either side. The castles of the period were easily defensible, so the fighting was mostly attrition warfare comprising sieges, raiding and skirmishing. Armies mostly consisted of armoured knights and footsoldiers, many of them mercenaries. In 1141, Stephen was captured following the 1141 Battle of Lincoln, causing a collapse in his authority over most of the country. When Empress Matilda attempted to be crowned queen, she was forced instead to retreat from London by hostile crowds; shortly afterwards, Robert of Gloucester was captured at the rout of Winchester. The two sides agreed to a prisoner exchange, swapping the captives Stephen and Robert. Stephen then almost captured Matilda in 1142 during the Siege of Oxford, but the Empress escaped from Oxford Castle across the frozen River Thames to safety.
 The war dragged on for many more years. Empress Matilda's husband, Count Geoffrey V of Anjou, conquered Normandy in her name during 1143, but in England neither side could achieve victory. Rebel barons began to acquire ever greater power in Northern England and in East Anglia, with widespread devastation in the regions of major fighting. In 1148, the Empress returned to Normandy, leaving the campaigning in England to her eldest son Henry FitzEmpress. In 1152, Stephen attempted to have his eldest son, Eustace of Boulogne, as the next king of England recognised by the Catholic Church, but the Church refused to do so. By the early 1150s, most barons and the Church were war weary so favoured negotiating a long-term peace.
 Henry FitzEmpress re-invaded England in 1153, but neither faction's forces were keen to fight. After limited campaigning, the two armies faced each other at the siege of Wallingford, but the church brokered a truce, thereby preventing a pitched battle. Stephen and Henry began peace negotiations, during which Eustace died of illness, removing Stephen's immediate heir. The resulting Treaty of Wallingford allowed Stephen to retain the throne but recognised Henry as his successor. Over the following year, Stephen began to reassert his authority over the whole kingdom, but died of disease in 1154. Henry was crowned as Henry II, the first Angevin king of England, then began a long period of reconstruction.
 The conflict was considered particularly destructive, even by the standards of medieval warfare. One chronicler stated that "Christ and his saints were asleep" during the period. Victorian historians coined the term "the Anarchy" because of the widespread chaos, although modern historians have questioned its accuracy and some contemporary accounts.[1]
 The origins of the Anarchy lay in a succession crisis involving England and Normandy. In the 11th and 12th centuries, north-west France was controlled by a number of dukes and counts, frequently in conflict with one another for valuable territory.[2] In 1066 one of these men, Duke William II of Normandy, mounted an invasion to conquer the rich Anglo-Saxon kingdom of England, pushing on into south Wales and northern England in the ensuing years. The division and control of these lands after William's death proved problematic and his children fought multiple wars over the spoils.[3] William's son Henry I seized power after the death of his elder brother William Rufus and subsequently invaded and captured the Duchy of Normandy, controlled by his eldest brother Robert Curthose, defeating Robert's army at the Battle of Tinchebray.[4] Henry intended for his lands to be inherited by his only legitimate son, seventeen-year-old William Adelin.[5]
 In 1120, the political landscape changed dramatically when the White Ship sank en route from Barfleur in Normandy to England; around three hundred passengers died, including Adelin.[6][nb 1] With Adelin dead, the inheritance to the English throne was thrown into doubt. Rules of succession in western Europe at the time were uncertain; in some parts of France, male primogeniture, in which the eldest son would inherit all titles, was becoming more popular.[8] In other parts of Europe, including Normandy and England, the tradition was for lands to be divided up, with the eldest son taking patrimonial lands – usually considered to be the most valuable – and younger sons being given smaller, or more recently acquired, partitions or estates.[8] The problem was further complicated by the sequence of unstable Anglo-Norman successions over the previous sixty years: there had been no peaceful, uncontested successions.[9]
 With William Adelin dead, Henry had only one other legitimate child, Matilda, but female rights of inheritance were unclear during this period.[10] Despite Henry taking a second wife, Adeliza of Louvain, it became increasingly unlikely that Henry would have another legitimate son and instead he looked to Matilda as his intended heir.[11] Matilda had been married to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor, from which she later claimed the title of empress. Her husband died in 1125 and she was remarried in 1128 to Geoffrey V of Anjou, whose county bordered the Duchy of Normandy.[12] Geoffrey was unpopular with the Anglo-Norman elite: as an Angevin ruler, he was a traditional enemy of the Normans.[13] At the same time, tensions continued to grow as a result of Henry's domestic policies, in particular the high level of revenue he was raising to pay for his various wars.[14] Conflict was curtailed by the power of the king's personality and reputation.[15]
 Henry attempted to build up a base of political support for Matilda in both England and Normandy, demanding that his court take oaths first in 1127, and then again in 1128 and 1131, to recognise Matilda as his immediate successor and recognise her descendants as the rightful ruler after her.[16] Stephen was amongst those who took this oath in 1127.[17] Nonetheless, relations between Henry, Matilda and Geoffrey became increasingly strained towards the end of the king's life. Matilda and Geoffrey suspected that they lacked genuine support in England, and proposed to Henry in 1135 that the king should hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda whilst he was still alive and insist on the Norman nobility swearing immediate allegiance to her, thereby giving the couple a much more powerful position after Henry's death.[18] Henry angrily declined to do so, probably out of a concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy somewhat earlier than intended.[19] A fresh rebellion broke out in southern Normandy, and Geoffrey and Matilda intervened militarily on behalf of the rebels.[8] In the middle of this confrontation, Henry unexpectedly fell ill and died near Lyons-la-Foret.[13]
 After Henry's death, the English throne was taken not by his daughter Matilda, but by Stephen of Blois, ultimately resulting in civil war. Stephen was the son of Stephen-Henry of Blois, one of the powerful counts of northern France, and Adela of Normandy, daughter of William the Conqueror. Stephen and Matilda were thus first cousins. His parents allied themselves with Henry, and Stephen, as a younger son without lands of his own, became Henry's client, travelling as part of his court and serving in his campaigns.[20] In return he received lands and was married to Matilda of Boulogne in 1125, the daughter and only heiress of the Count of Boulogne, who owned the important continental port of Boulogne and vast estates in the north-west and south-east of England.[21] By 1135, Stephen was a well established figure in Anglo-Norman society, while his younger brother Henry had also risen to prominence, becoming the Bishop of Winchester and the second-richest man in England after the king.[22] Henry of Winchester was keen to reverse what he perceived as encroachment by the Norman kings on the rights of the church.[23]
 When news began to spread of Henry I's death, many of the potential claimants to the throne were not well placed to respond. Geoffrey and Matilda were in Anjou, rather awkwardly supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army, which included a number of Matilda's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester.[8] Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late king was properly buried, which prevented them from returning to England.[24] Nonetheless, Geoffrey and Matilda took the opportunity to march into southern Normandy and seize a number of key castles; there they stopped, unable to advance further.[25] Stephen's elder brother Theobald, who had succeeded his father as count, was further south still, in Blois.[26]
 Stephen was conveniently placed in Boulogne, and when news reached him of Henry's death he left for England, accompanied by his military household. Robert of Gloucester had garrisoned the ports of Dover and Canterbury and some accounts suggest that they refused Stephen access when he first arrived.[27] Nonetheless Stephen probably reached his own estate on the edge of London by 8 December and over the next week he began to seize power in England.[28]
 The crowds in London traditionally claimed a right to elect the king of England,[clarification needed] and they proclaimed Stephen the new monarch, believing that he would grant the city new rights and privileges in return.[29] Henry of Blois delivered the support of the church to Stephen: Stephen was able to advance to Winchester, where Roger, who was both the Bishop of Salisbury and the Lord Chancellor, instructed the royal treasury to be handed over to Stephen.[30] On 15 December, Henry delivered an agreement under which Stephen would grant extensive freedoms and liberties to the church, in exchange for the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Papal Legate supporting his succession to the throne.[31] There was the slight problem of the religious oath that Stephen had taken to support the Empress Matilda, but Henry convincingly argued that the late king had been wrong to insist that his court take the oath.[32] Furthermore, the late king had only insisted on that oath to protect the stability of the kingdom, and in light of the chaos that might now ensue, Stephen would be justified in ignoring it.[32] Henry was also able to persuade Hugh Bigod, the late king's royal steward, to swear that the king had changed his mind about the succession on his deathbed, nominating Stephen instead.[32][nb 2] Stephen's coronation was held a week later at Westminster Abbey on 26 December.[34][nb 3]
 Meanwhile, the Norman nobility gathered at Le Neubourg to discuss declaring Theobald king, probably following the news that Stephen was gathering support in England.[36] The Normans argued that the count, as the more senior grandson of William the Conqueror, had the most valid claim over the kingdom and the duchy, and was certainly preferable to Matilda.[26] Theobald met with the Norman barons and Robert of Gloucester at Lisieux on 21 December but their discussions were interrupted by the sudden news from England that Stephen's coronation was to occur the next day.[37] Theobald then agreed to the Normans' proposal that he be made king, only to find that his former support immediately ebbed away: the barons were not prepared to support the division of England and Normandy by opposing Stephen.[38] Stephen subsequently financially compensated Theobald, who in return remained in Blois and supported his brother's succession.[39][nb 4]
 Stephen had to intervene in the north of England immediately after his coronation.[33] David I of Scotland, brother of Henry I's first queen and maternal uncle of Matilda, invaded the north on the news of Henry's death, taking Carlisle, Newcastle and other key strongholds.[33] Northern England was a disputed territory at this time, with the Scottish kings laying a traditional claim to Cumberland, and David also claiming Northumbria by virtue of his marriage to the daughter of the former Anglo-Saxon earl Waltheof.[41] Stephen rapidly marched north with an army and met David at Durham.[42] An agreement was made under which David would return most of the territory he had taken, with the exception of Carlisle. In return, Stephen confirmed David's son Prince Henry's possessions in England, including the Earldom of Huntingdon.[42]
 Returning south, Stephen held his first royal court at Easter 1136.[43] A wide range of nobles gathered at Westminster for the event, including many of the Anglo-Norman barons and most of the higher officials of the church.[44] Stephen issued a new royal charter, confirming the promises he had made to the church, promising to reverse Henry's policies on the royal forests and to reform any abuses of the royal legal system.[45] Stephen portrayed himself as the natural successor to Henry I's policies, and reconfirmed the existing seven earldoms in the kingdom on their existing holders.[46] The Easter court was a lavish event, and a large amount of money was spent on the event itself, clothes and gifts.[47] Stephen gave out grants of land and favours to those present, and endowed numerous church foundations with land and privileges.[48] Stephen's accession to the throne still needed to be ratified by the Pope, and Henry of Blois appears to have been responsible for ensuring that testimonials of support were sent from Stephen's elder brother Theobald and from the French king Louis VI, to whom Stephen represented a useful balance to Angevin power in the north of France.[49] Pope Innocent II confirmed Stephen as king by letter later that year, and Stephen's advisers circulated copies widely around England to demonstrate Stephen's legitimacy.[50]
 Troubles continued across Stephen's new kingdom. After the Welsh victory at the Battle of Llwchwr in January 1136 and the successful ambush of Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare in April, south Wales rose in rebellion, starting in east Glamorgan and rapidly spreading across the rest of south Wales during 1137.[51] Owain Gwynedd and Gruffydd ap Rhys captured considerable territories, including Carmarthen Castle.[41] Stephen responded by sending Richard's brother Baldwin and the Marcher Lord Robert Fitz Harold of Ewyas into Wales to pacify the region. Neither mission was particularly successful and by the end of 1137 the king appears to have abandoned attempts to put down the rebellion. Historian David Crouch suggests that Stephen effectively "bowed out of Wales" around this time to concentrate on his other problems.[52] Meanwhile, Stephen had put down two revolts in the south-west led by Baldwin de Redvers and Robert of Bampton; Baldwin was released after his capture and travelled to Normandy, where he became an increasingly vocal critic of the king.[53]
 Geoffrey of Anjou attacked Normandy in early 1136 and, after a temporary truce, invaded later the same year, raiding and burning estates rather than trying to hold the territory.[54] Events in England meant that Stephen was unable to travel to Normandy himself, so Waleran de Beaumont, appointed by Stephen as the lieutenant of Normandy, and Theobald led the efforts to defend the duchy.[55] Stephen himself only returned to the duchy in 1137, where he met with Louis VI and Theobald to agree to an informal regional alliance, probably brokered by Henry, to counter the growing Angevin power in the region.[56] As part of this deal, Louis recognised Stephen's son Eustace as Duke of Normandy in exchange for Eustace giving fealty to the French king.[57] Stephen was less successful in regaining the Argentan province along the Normandy and Anjou border, which Geoffrey had taken at the end of 1135.[58] Stephen formed an army to retake it, but the frictions between his Flemish mercenary forces led by William of Ypres and the local Norman barons resulted in a battle between the two halves of his army.[59] The Norman forces then deserted the king, forcing Stephen to give up his campaign.[60] Stephen agreed to another truce with Geoffrey, promising to pay him 2,000 marks a year in exchange for peace along the Norman borders.[54][nb 5]
 Stephen's first years as king can be interpreted in different ways. Seen positively, Stephen stabilised the northern border with Scotland, contained Geoffrey's attacks on Normandy, was at peace with Louis VI, enjoyed good relations with the church and had the broad support of his barons.[63] There were significant underlying problems, nonetheless. The north of England was now controlled by David and Prince Henry, Stephen had abandoned Wales, the fighting in Normandy had considerably destabilised the duchy, and an increasing number of barons felt that Stephen had given them neither the lands nor the titles they felt they deserved or were owed.[64] Stephen was also rapidly running out of money: Henry's considerable treasury had been emptied by 1138 due to the costs of running Stephen's more lavish court, and the need to raise and maintain his mercenary armies fighting in England and Normandy.[65]
 Fighting broke out on several fronts during 1138. Firstly, Robert of Gloucester rebelled against the king, starting the descent into civil war in England.[65] An illegitimate son of Henry I and the half-brother of the Empress Matilda, Robert was one of the most powerful Anglo-Norman barons, controlling estates in Normandy as well as the Earldom of Gloucester.[66] In 1138, Robert renounced his fealty to Stephen and declared his support for Matilda, triggering a major regional rebellion in Kent and across the south-west of England, although Robert himself remained in Normandy.[67] Matilda had not been particularly active in asserting her claims to the throne since 1135 and in many ways it was Robert that took the initiative in declaring war in 1138.[68] In France, Geoffrey took advantage of the situation by re-invading Normandy. David of Scotland also invaded the north of England once again, announcing that he was supporting the claim of his niece the Empress Matilda to the throne, pushing south into Yorkshire.[69][nb 6]
 Stephen rapidly responded to the revolts and invasions, focusing primarily on England rather than Normandy. His wife Matilda was sent to Kent with ships and resources from Boulogne, with the task of retaking the key port of Dover, under Robert's control.[66] A small number of Stephen's household knights were sent north to help the fight against the Scots, where David's forces were defeated later that year at the Battle of the Standard in August by the forces of Thurstan, the Archbishop of York.[69] Despite this victory, David still occupied most of the north of England.[69] Stephen himself went west in an attempt to regain control of Gloucestershire, first striking north into the Welsh Marches, taking Hereford and Shrewsbury, then heading south to Bath.[66] Bristol proved too strong for him, and Stephen contented himself with raiding and pillaging the surrounding area.[66] The rebels appear to have expected Robert to intervene with support, but he remained in Normandy throughout the year, trying to persuade the Empress Matilda to invade England herself.[70] Dover finally surrendered to the queen's forces later in the year.[71]
 Stephen's military campaign in England had progressed well, and historian David Crouch describes it as "a military achievement of the first rank".[71] The king took the opportunity of his military advantage to forge a peace agreement with Scotland.[71] Stephen's wife Matilda was sent to negotiate another agreement between Stephen and David, called the treaty of Durham; Northumbria and Cumbria would effectively be granted to David and his son Henry, in exchange for their fealty and future peace along the border.[69] The powerful Ranulf, Earl of Chester, considered himself to hold the traditional rights to Carlisle and Cumberland and was extremely displeased to see them being given to the Scots, a problem which would have long lasting implications in the war.[72]
 By 1139, an invasion of England by Robert and Matilda appeared imminent. Geoffrey and Matilda had secured much of Normandy and, together with Robert, spent the beginning of the year mobilising forces ready for a cross-Channel expedition.[73] Matilda also appealed to the papacy at the start of the year, putting forward her legal claim to the English throne; unsurprisingly, the pope declined to reverse his earlier support for Stephen, but from Matilda's perspective the case usefully established that Stephen's claim was disputed.[74]
 Meanwhile, Stephen prepared for the coming conflict by creating a number of additional earldoms.[75] Only a handful of earldoms had existed under Henry I and these had been largely symbolic in nature. Stephen created many more, filling them with men he considered to be loyal, capable military commanders, and in the more vulnerable parts of the country assigning them new lands and additional executive powers.[76][nb 7] Stephen appears to have had several objectives in mind, including both ensuring the loyalty of his key supporters by granting them these honours, and improving his defences in vulnerable parts of the kingdom. Stephen was heavily influenced by his principal advisor, Waleran de Beaumont, the twin brother of Robert of Leicester. The Beaumont twins and their younger brother and cousins received the majority of these new earldoms.[78] From 1138 onwards, Stephen gave them the earldoms of Worcester, Leicester, Hertford, Warwick and Pembroke, which—especially when combined with the possessions of Stephen's new ally, Prince Henry, in Cumberland and Northumbria—created a wide block of territory to act as a buffer zone between the troubled south-west, Chester and the rest of the kingdom.[79]
 Stephen took steps to remove a group of bishops he regarded as a threat to his rule. The royal administration under Henry I had been headed by Roger, the Bishop of Salisbury, supported by Roger's nephews, Alexander and Nigel, the Bishops of Lincoln and Ely respectively, and Roger's son, Roger le Poer, who was the Lord Chancellor.[80] These bishops were powerful landowners as well as ecclesiastical rulers, and they had begun to build new castles and increase the size of their military forces, leading Stephen to suspect that they were about to defect to the Empress Matilda. Roger and his family were also enemies of Waleran, who disliked their control of the royal administration.[81] In June 1139, Stephen held his court in Oxford, where a fight between Alan of Brittany and Roger's men broke out, an incident probably deliberately created by Stephen.[81] Stephen responded by demanding that Roger and the other bishops surrender all of their castles in England. This threat was backed up by the arrest of the bishops, with the exception of Nigel who had taken refuge in Devizes Castle; the bishop only surrendered after Stephen besieged the castle and threatened to execute Roger le Poer.[82] The remaining castles were then surrendered to the king.[81][nb 8] The incident removed any military threat from the bishops, but it may have damaged Stephen's relationship with the senior clergy, and in particular with his brother Henry.[84][nb 9] Both sides were now ready for war.
 Anglo-Norman warfare during the civil war was characterised by attritional military campaigns, in which commanders tried to raid enemy lands and seize castles in order to allow them to take control of their adversaries' territory, ultimately winning slow, strategic victories.[86] Occasionally pitched battles were fought between armies but these were considered highly risky endeavours and were usually avoided by prudent commanders.[86] Despite the use of feudal levies, Norman warfare traditionally depended on rulers raising and spending large sums of cash.[87] The cost of warfare had risen considerably in the first part of the 12th century, and adequate supplies of ready cash were increasingly proving important in the success of campaigns.[88]
 Stephen and Matilda's households centred on small bodies of knights called the familia regis; this inner circle formed the basis for a headquarters in any military campaign.[89] The armies of the period were still similar to those of the previous century, comprising bodies of mounted, armoured knights, supported by infantry.[90] Many of these men would have worn long mail hauberks, with helmets, greaves and arm protection.[90] Swords were common, along with lances for cavalry; crossbowmen had become more numerous, and longbows were occasionally used in battle alongside the older shortbow.[90] These forces were either feudal levies, drawn up by local nobles for a limited period of service during a campaign or, increasingly, mercenaries, who were expensive but more flexible in the duration of their service and often more skilled.[91]
 The Normans had first developed castles in the 10th and 11th centuries, and their occupation of England after 1066 had made extensive use of them. Most castles took the form of earthwork and timber motte-and-bailey or ringwork constructs; easily built with local labour and resources, these were resilient and easy to defend. The Anglo-Norman elite became adept at strategically placing these castles along rivers and valleys to control populations, trade and regions.[92] In the decades before the civil war, some newer, stone-built keeps had begun to be introduced. Unlike the more traditional designs, these required expensive skilled labourers and could only be built slowly over many seasons. Although these square keeps later proved to have vulnerabilities, the ballistae and mangonels used in the 1140s were significantly less powerful than the later trebuchet designs, giving defenders a substantial advantage over attackers.[93] As a result, slow sieges to starve defenders out, or mining operations to undermine walls, tended to be preferred by commanders over direct assaults.[86]
 Both sides responded by building new castles, sometimes creating systems of strategic fortifications. In the south-west Matilda's supporters built a range of castles to protect the territory, usually motte-and-bailey designs such as those at Winchcombe, Upper Slaughter, or Bampton.[94] Similarly, Stephen built a new chain of fen-edge castles at Burwell, Lidgate, Rampton, Caxton, and Swavesey – each about six to nine miles (ten to fifteen km) apart – in order to protect his lands around Cambridge.[95] Many of these castles were termed "adulterine", unauthorised, because, in the chaos of the war, no royal permission had given to the lord for their construction.[96] Contemporary chroniclers saw this as a matter of concern; Robert of Torigni suggested that as many as 1,115 such castles had been built during the conflict, although this was probably an exaggeration as elsewhere he suggests an alternative figure of 126.[97]
 Another feature of the war was the creation of many "counter-castles".[98] or "siege castles". At least 17 such sites have been identified through documentary and archaeological research, but this likely under-estimates the number that were built during the conflict.[99] These had been used in English conflicts for several years before the civil war and involved building a basic castle during a siege, alongside the main target of attack.[100] Typically these would be built in either a ringwork or a motte-and-bailey design between 200 and 300 yards (180 to 270 metres) away from the target, just beyond the range of a bow.[100] Counter-castles could be used to either act as platforms for siege weaponry, or as bases for controlling the region in their own right.[101] Most siege castles were intended for temporary use and were often destroyed (slighted) afterwards. While most survive poorly, the earthworks of 'the Rings' near Corfe Castle in Dorset is an unusually well preserved example.[102]
 King Stephen was extremely wealthy, well-mannered, modest and liked by his peers; he was also considered a man capable of firm action.[103] His personal qualities as a military leader focused on his skill in personal combat, his capabilities in siege warfare and a remarkable ability to move military forces quickly over relatively long distances.[104] Rumours of his father's cowardice during the First Crusade continued to circulate, and a desire to avoid the same reputation may have influenced some of Stephen's rasher military actions.[105] Stephen drew heavily on his wife, Queen Matilda of Boulogne (not to be confused with Empress Matilda), during the conflict, both for leading negotiations and maintaining his cause and army while imprisoned in 1141; Matilda led the royal household during this period in partnership with Stephen's mercenary leader William of Ypres.[106]
 The Empress's faction lacked an equivalent war leader to Stephen. Matilda had a firm grounding in government from her time as empress, where she had presided in court cases and acted as regent in Italy with the Imperial army on campaign.[107] Nonetheless, Matilda, as a woman, could not personally lead forces into battle.[108] Matilda was less popular with contemporary chroniclers than Stephen; in many ways she took after her father, being prepared to loudly demand compliance of her court, when necessary issuing threats and generally appearing arrogant.[109] This was felt to be particularly inappropriate since she was a woman.[110] Matilda's husband, Geoffrey of Anjou, played an important role in seizing Normandy during the war but did not cross into England. Geoffrey and Matilda's marriage was not an easy one; it had almost collapsed altogether in 1130.[111]
 For most of the war, therefore, the Angevin armies were led into battle by a handful of senior nobles. The most important of these was Robert of Gloucester, the half-brother of the Empress. He was known for his qualities as a statesman, his military experience and leadership ability.[66] Robert had tried to convince Theobald to take the throne in 1135; he did not attend Stephen's first court in 1136 and it took several summonses to convince him to attend court at Oxford later that year.[112] Miles of Gloucester was another capable military leader up until his death in 1143; there were some political tensions between him and Robert, but the two could work together on campaigns.[113] One of Matilda's most loyal followers was Brian Fitz Count, like Miles a marcher lord from Wales. Fitz Count was apparently motivated by a strong moral duty to uphold his oath to Matilda and proved critical in defending the Thames corridor.[114]
 The Angevin invasion finally arrived in August. Baldwin de Redvers crossed over from Normandy to Wareham in an initial attempt to capture a port to receive the Empress Matilda's invading army, but Stephen's forces forced him to retreat into the south-west.[115] The following month the Empress was invited by the Dowager Queen Adeliza to land at Arundel instead, and on 30 September Robert of Gloucester and the Empress arrived in England with 140 knights.[115][nb 10] Matilda stayed at Arundel Castle, whilst Robert marched north-west to Wallingford and Bristol, hoping to raise support for the rebellion and to link up with Miles of Gloucester, who took the opportunity to renounce his fealty to the king.[117]
 Stephen responded by promptly moving south, besieging Arundel and trapping Matilda inside the castle.[118] Stephen then agreed to a truce proposed by his brother, Henry of Blois; the full details of the truce are not known, but the results were that Stephen first released Matilda from the siege and then allowed her and her household of knights to be escorted to the south-west, where they were reunited with Robert of Gloucester.[118] The reasoning behind Stephen's decision to release his rival remains unclear. Contemporary chroniclers suggested that Henry argued that it would be in Stephen's own best interests to release the Empress and concentrate instead on attacking Robert, and Stephen may have seen Robert, not the Empress, as his main opponent at this point in the conflict.[118] Stephen also faced a military dilemma at Arundel—the castle was considered almost impregnable, and he may have been worried that he was tying down his army in the south whilst Robert roamed freely in the west.[119] Another theory is that Stephen released Matilda out of a sense of chivalry; Stephen was certainly known for having a generous, courteous personality and women were not normally expected to be targeted in Anglo-Norman warfare.[120][nb 11]
 Although there had been few new defections to the Empress, Matilda now controlled a compact block of territory stretching out from Gloucester and Bristol south-west into Devon and Cornwall, west into the Welsh Marches and east as far as Oxford and Wallingford, threatening London.[122] She had established her court in Gloucester, close to Robert's stronghold of Bristol but far enough away for her to remain independent of her half-brother.[123] Stephen set about reclaiming the region.[124] He started by attacking Wallingford Castle which controlled the Thames corridor; it was held by Brien FitzCount and Stephen found it too well defended.[125] Stephen left behind some forces to blockade the castle and continued west into Wiltshire to attack Trowbridge, taking the castles of South Cerney and Malmesbury en route.[126] Meanwhile, Miles of Gloucester marched east, attacking Stephen's rearguard forces at Wallingford and threatening an advance on London.[127] Stephen was forced to give up his western campaign, returning east to stabilise the situation and protect his capital.[128]
 At the start of 1140, Nigel, the Bishop of Ely, whose castles Stephen had confiscated the previous year, rebelled against Stephen as well.[128] Nigel hoped to seize East Anglia and established his base of operations in the Isle of Ely, then surrounded by protective fenland.[128] Stephen responded quickly, taking an army into the fens and using boats lashed together to form a causeway that allowed him to make a surprise attack on the isle.[129] Nigel escaped to Gloucester, but his men and castle were captured, and order was temporarily restored in the east.[129] Robert of Gloucester's men retook some of the territory that Stephen had taken in his 1139 campaign.[130] In an effort to negotiate a truce, Henry of Blois held a peace conference at Bath, at which Robert represented the Empress, and Queen Matilda and Archbishop Theobald the King.[131] The conference collapsed over the insistence by Henry and the clergy that they should set the terms of any peace deal, which Stephen found unacceptable.[132]
 Ranulf of Chester remained upset over Stephen's gift of the north of England to Prince Henry.[72] Ranulf devised a plan for dealing with the problem by ambushing Henry whilst the prince was travelling back from Stephen's court to Scotland after Christmas.[72] Stephen responded to rumours of this plan by escorting Henry himself north, but this gesture proved the final straw for Ranulf.[72] Ranulf had previously claimed that he had the rights to Lincoln Castle, held by Stephen, and under the guise of a social visit, Ranulf seized the fortification in a surprise attack.[133] Stephen marched north to Lincoln and agreed to a truce with Ranulf, probably to keep him from joining the Empress's faction, under which Ranulf would be allowed to keep the castle.[134] Stephen returned to London but received news that Ranulf, his brother and their family were relaxing in Lincoln Castle with a minimal guard force, a ripe target for a surprise attack of his own.[134] Abandoning the deal he had just made, Stephen gathered his army again and sped north, but not quite fast enough—Ranulf escaped Lincoln and declared his support for the Empress, and Stephen was forced to place the castle under siege.[134]
 While Stephen and his army besieged Lincoln Castle at the start of 1141, Robert of Gloucester and Ranulf of Chester advanced on the king's position with a somewhat larger force.[135] When the news reached Stephen, he held a council to decide whether to give battle or to withdraw and gather additional soldiers: Stephen decided to fight, resulting in the Battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141.[135] The king commanded the centre of his army, with Alan of Brittany on his right and William of Aumale on his left.[136] Robert and Ranulf's forces had superiority in cavalry and Stephen dismounted many of his own knights to form a solid infantry block; he joined them himself, fighting on foot in the battle.[136][nb 12] Stephen was not a gifted public speaker, and delegated the pre-battle speech to Baldwin of Clare, who delivered a rousing declaration.[138] After an initial success in which William's forces destroyed the Angevins' Welsh infantry, the battle went badly for Stephen.[139] Robert and Ranulf's cavalry encircled Stephen's centre, and the king found himself surrounded by the enemy army.[139] Many of Stephen's supporters, including Waleron de Beaumont and William of Ypres, fled from the field at this point but Stephen fought on, defending himself first with his sword and then, when that broke, with a borrowed battle axe.[140] Finally, he was overwhelmed by Robert's men and taken away from the field in custody.[140][nb 13]
 Robert took Stephen back to Gloucester, where the king met with the Empress Matilda, and was then moved to Bristol Castle, traditionally used for holding high-status prisoners.[142] He was initially left confined in relatively good conditions, but his security was later tightened and he was kept in chains.[142] The Empress now began to take the necessary steps to have herself crowned queen in his place, which would require the agreement of the church and her coronation at Westminster Abbey.[143] Stephen's brother Henry summoned a council at Winchester before Easter in his capacity as papal legate to consider the clergy's view. He had made a private deal with the Empress Matilda that he would deliver the support of the church, if she agreed to give him control over church business in England.[144] Henry handed over the royal treasury, rather depleted except for Stephen's crown, to the Empress, and excommunicated many of Stephen's supporters who refused to switch sides.[145] Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury was unwilling to declare Matilda queen so rapidly, and a delegation of clergy and nobles, headed by Theobald, travelled to see Stephen in Bristol and consult about their moral dilemma: should they abandon their oaths of fealty to the king?[144] Stephen agreed that, given the situation, he was prepared to release his subjects from their oath of fealty to him.[146]
 The clergy gathered again in Winchester after Easter to declare the Empress "Lady of England and Normandy" as a precursor to her coronation.[146] While Matilda's own followers attended the event, few other major nobles seem to have attended and a delegation from London prevaricated.[147] Queen Matilda wrote to complain and demand Stephen's release.[148] The Empress Matilda then advanced to London to stage her coronation in June, where her position became precarious.[149] Despite securing the support of Geoffrey de Mandeville, who controlled the Tower of London, forces loyal to Stephen and Queen Matilda remained close to the city and the citizens were fearful about welcoming the Empress.[150] On 24 June, shortly before the planned coronation, the city rose up against the Empress and Geoffrey de Mandeville; Matilda and her followers only just fled in time, making a chaotic retreat to Oxford.[151]
 Meanwhile, Geoffrey of Anjou invaded Normandy again and, in the absence of Waleran of Beaumont, who was still fighting in England, Geoffrey took all the duchy south of the River Seine and east of the Risle.[152] No help was forthcoming from Stephen's brother Theobald this time either, who appears to have been preoccupied with his own problems with France—the new French king, Louis VII, had rejected his father's regional alliance, improving relations with Anjou and taking a more bellicose line with Theobald, which would result in war the following year.[153] Geoffrey's success in Normandy and Stephen's weakness in England began to influence the loyalty of many Anglo-Norman barons, who feared losing their lands in England to Robert and the Empress, and their possessions in Normandy to Geoffrey.[154] Many started to leave Stephen's faction. His friend and advisor Waleron was one of those who decided to defect in mid-1141, crossing into Normandy to secure his ancestral possessions by allying himself with the Angevins, and bringing Worcestershire into the Empress's camp.[155] Waleron's twin brother, Robert of Leicester, effectively withdrew from fighting in the conflict at the same time. Other supporters of the Empress were restored in their former strongholds, such as Bishop Nigel of Ely, and others still received new earldoms in the west of England. The royal control over the minting of coins broke down, leading to coins being struck by local barons and bishops across the country.[156]
 Stephen's wife Matilda played a critical part in keeping the king's cause alive during his captivity. Queen Matilda gathered Stephen's remaining lieutenants around her and the royal family in the south-east, advancing into London when the population rejected the Empress.[157] Stephen's long-standing commander William of Ypres remained with the queen in London; William Martel, the royal steward, commanded operations from Sherborne in Dorset, and Faramus of Boulogne ran the royal household.[158] The queen appears to have generated genuine sympathy and support from Stephen's more loyal followers.[157] Henry's alliance with the Empress proved short-lived, as they soon fell out over political patronage and ecclesiastical policy; the bishop met Stephen's wife Queen Matilda at Guildford and transferred his support to her.[159]
 The Empress's position was transformed by her defeat at the rout of Winchester. Following their retreat from London, Robert of Gloucester and the Empress besieged Henry in his episcopal castle at Winchester in July.[160] Matilda was using the royal castle in the city of Winchester as a base for her operations, but shortly afterwards Queen Matilda and William of Ypres then encircled the Angevin forces with their own army, reinforced with fresh troops from London.[161] The Empress Matilda decided to escape from the city with her close associates Fitz Count and Reginald of Cornwall, while the rest of her army delayed the royal forces.[162] In the subsequent battle the Empress's forces were defeated and Robert of Gloucester himself was taken prisoner during the retreat, although Matilda herself escaped, exhausted, to her fortress at Devizes.[163]
 With both Stephen and Robert held prisoner, negotiations were held to try to agree a long term peace settlement, but Queen Matilda was unwilling to offer any compromise to the Empress, and Robert refused to accept any offer to encourage him to change sides to Stephen.[164] Instead, in November the two sides simply exchanged the two leaders, Stephen returning to his queen, and Robert to the Empress in Oxford.[165] Henry held another church council, which reversed its previous decision and reaffirmed Stephen's legitimacy to rule, and a fresh coronation of Stephen and Matilda occurred at Christmas 1141.[164] At the beginning of 1142 Stephen fell ill, and by Easter rumours had begun to circulate that he had died.[166] Possibly this illness was the result of his imprisonment the previous year, but he finally recovered and travelled north to raise new forces and to successfully convince Ranulf of Chester to change sides once again.[167] Stephen then spent the summer attacking some of the new Angevin castles built the previous year, including Cirencester, Bampton and Wareham.[168]
 During mid-1142 Robert returned to Normandy to assist Geoffrey with operations against some of Stephen's remaining followers there; he returned to England later in the year.[169] Meanwhile, Matilda came under increased pressure from Stephen's forces and had become surrounded at Oxford.[168] Oxford was a secure town, protected by walls and the River Isis, but Stephen led a sudden attack across the river, leading the charge and swimming part of the way.[170] Once on the other side, the king and his men broke into the town, trapping the Empress in the castle.[170] Oxford Castle was a powerful fortress and, rather than storming it, Stephen had to settle down for a long siege, secure in the knowledge that Matilda was now surrounded.[170] Just before Christmas, the Empress sneaked out of the castle, crossed the icy river on foot and made her escape past the royal army to safety at Wallingford, leaving the castle garrison free to surrender the next day. Matilda stayed with Fitz Count for a period, then reestablished her court at Devizes.[171]
 The war between the two sides in England reached a stalemate in the mid-1140s, while Geoffrey of Anjou consolidated his hold on power in Normandy, being recognised as duke of Normandy after taking Rouen in 1144.[172] 1143 started precariously for Stephen when he was besieged by Robert of Gloucester at Wilton Castle, an assembly point for royal forces in Herefordshire.[173] Stephen attempted to break out and escape, resulting in the Battle of Wilton. Once again, the Angevin cavalry proved too strong, and for a moment it appeared that Stephen might be captured for a second time.[174] On this occasion William Martel, Stephen's steward, made a fierce rear guard effort, allowing Stephen to escape from the battlefield.[173] Stephen valued William's loyalty sufficiently to agree to exchange Sherborne Castle for his safe release—this was one of the few instances where Stephen was prepared to give up a castle to ransom one of his men.[175]
 In late 1143, Stephen faced a new threat in the east, when Geoffrey de Mandeville, the Earl of Essex, rose up in rebellion against the king in East Anglia.[176] Stephen had disliked the baron for several years, and provoked the conflict by summoning Geoffrey to court, where the king arrested him.[177] Stephen threatened to execute Geoffrey unless the baron handed over his various castles, including the Tower of London, Saffron Walden and Pleshey, all important fortifications because they were in, or close to, London.[177] Geoffrey gave in, but once free he headed north-east into the Fens to the Isle of Ely, from where he began a military campaign against Cambridge, with the intention of progressing south towards London.[178] With all of his other problems and with Hugh Bigod still in open revolt in Norfolk, Stephen lacked the resources to track Geoffrey down in the Fens and made do with building a screen of castles between Ely and London, including Burwell Castle.[179]
 For a period, the situation continued to worsen. Ranulf of Chester revolted once again in the middle of 1144, splitting up Stephen's Honour of Lancaster between himself and Prince Henry.[180] In the west, Robert of Gloucester and his followers continued to raid the surrounding royalist territories, and Wallingford Castle remained a secure Angevin stronghold, too close to London for comfort.[180] Meanwhile, Geoffrey of Anjou finished securing his hold on southern Normandy and in January 1144 he advanced into Rouen, the capital of the duchy, concluding his campaign.[167] Louis VII recognised him as Duke of Normandy shortly after.[181] By this point in the war, Stephen was depending increasingly on his immediate royal household, such as William of Ypres and others, and lacked the support of the major barons who might have been able to provide him with significant additional forces; after the events of 1141, Stephen made little use of his network of earls.[182]
 After 1143 the war ground on, but progressing slightly better for Stephen.[183] Miles of Gloucester, one of the most talented Angevin commanders, had died whilst hunting over the previous Christmas, relieving some of the pressure in the west.[184] Geoffrey de Mandeville's rebellion continued until September 1144, when he died during an attack on Burwell.[185] The war in the west progressed better in 1145, with the king recapturing Faringdon Castle in Oxfordshire.[185] In the north, Stephen came to a fresh agreement with Ranulf of Chester, but then in 1146 repeated the ruse he had played on Geoffrey de Mandeville in 1143, first inviting Ranulf to court, then arresting him and threatening to execute him unless he handed over several castles, including Lincoln and Coventry.[180] As with Geoffrey, the moment Ranulf was released he immediately rebelled, but the situation was a stalemate: Stephen had few forces in the north with which to prosecute a fresh campaign, whilst Ranulf lacked the castles to support an attack on Stephen.[180] By this point, Stephen's practice of inviting barons to court and arresting them had brought him into some disrepute and increasing distrust.[186]
 The character of the conflict in England gradually began to shift; as historian Frank Barlow suggests, by the late 1140s "the civil war was over", barring the occasional outbreak of fighting.[187] In 1147 Robert of Gloucester died peacefully, and the next year the Empress Matilda defused an argument with the Church over the ownership of Devizes Castle by returning to Normandy, contributing to reducing the tempo of the war.[188] The Second Crusade was announced, and many Angevin supporters, including Waleran of Beaumont, joined it, leaving the region for several years.[187] Many of the barons were making individual peace agreements with each other to secure their lands and war gains.[189] Geoffrey and Matilda's son, the future King Henry II, mounted a small mercenary invasion of England in 1147 but the expedition failed, not least because Henry lacked the funds to pay his men.[187] Surprisingly, Stephen himself ended up paying their costs, allowing Henry to return home safely; his reasons for doing so are unclear. One potential explanation is his general courtesy to a member of his extended family; another is that he was starting to consider how to end the war peacefully, and saw this as a way of building a relationship with Henry.[190]
 Many of the most powerful nobles began to make their own truces and disarmament agreements, signing treaties between one another that typically promised an end to bilateral hostilities, limited the building of new castles, or agreed limits to the size of armies sent against one another.[191] Typically these treaties included clauses that recognised that the nobles might, of course, be forced to fight each other by instruction of their rulers.[192] A network of treaties had emerged by the 1150s, reducing – but not eliminating – the degree of local fighting in England.[193]
 Matilda remained in Normandy for the rest of the war, focusing on stabilising the duchy and promoting her son's rights to the English throne.[194] The young Henry FitzEmpress returned to England again in 1149, this time planning to form a northern alliance with Ranulf of Chester.[195] The Angevin plan involved Ranulf agreeing to give up his claim to Carlisle, held by the Scots, in return for being given the rights to the whole of the Honour of Lancaster; Ranulf would give homage to both David and Henry FitzEmpress, with Henry having seniority.[196] Following this peace agreement, Henry and Ranulf agreed to attack York, probably with help from the Scots.[197] Stephen marched rapidly north to York and the planned attack disintegrated, leaving Henry to return to Normandy, where he was declared Duke by his father.[198][nb 14] Although still young, Henry was increasingly gaining a reputation as an energetic and capable leader. His prestige and power increased further when he unexpectedly married Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152; Eleanor was the attractive Duchess of Aquitaine and the recently divorced wife of Louis VII of France, and the marriage made Henry the future ruler of a huge swathe of territory across France.[199]
 In the final years of the war, Stephen too began to focus on the issue of his family and the succession.[200] Stephen had given his eldest son Eustace the County of Boulogne in 1147, but it remained unclear whether Eustace would inherit England.[201] Stephen's preferred option was to have Eustace crowned while he himself was still alive, as was the custom in France, but this was not the normal practice in England, and Celestine II, during his brief tenure as pope between 1143 and 1144, had banned any change to this practice.[201] The only person who could crown Eustace was Archbishop Theobald, who may well have seen the coronation of Eustace only as a guarantee of further civil war after Stephen's death; the Archbishop refused to crown Eustace without agreement from the current pope, Eugene III, and the matter reached an impasse.[202] Stephen's situation was made worse by various arguments with members of the Church over rights and privileges.[203] Stephen made a fresh attempt to have Eustace crowned at Easter 1152, gathering his nobles to swear fealty to Eustace, and then insisting that Theobald and his bishops anoint him king.[204] When Theobald refused yet again, Stephen and Eustace imprisoned both him and the bishops and refused to release them unless they agreed to crown Eustace.[204] Theobald escaped again into temporary exile in Flanders, pursued to the coast by Stephen's knights, marking a low point in Stephen's relationship with the church.[204]
 Henry FitzEmpress returned to England again at the start of 1153 with a small army, supported in the north and east of England by Ranulf of Chester and Hugh Bigod.[205] Stephen's castle at Malmesbury was besieged by Henry's forces and the king responded by marching west with an army to relieve it.[206] Stephen unsuccessfully attempted to force Henry's smaller army to fight a decisive battle along the River Avon.[206] In the face of the increasingly wintry weather, Stephen agreed to a temporary truce and returned to London, leaving Henry to travel north through the Midlands where the powerful Robert de Beaumont, Earl of Leicester, announced his support for the Angevin cause.[206] Despite only modest military successes, Henry and his allies now controlled the south-west, the Midlands and much of the north of England.[207] A delegation of senior English clergy met with Henry and his advisers at Stockbridge shortly before Easter.[208] Many of the details of their discussions are unclear, but it appears that the churchmen emphasised that while they supported Stephen as king, they sought a negotiated peace; Henry reaffirmed that he would avoid the English cathedrals and would not expect the bishops to attend his court.[209]
 Stephen intensified the long-running siege of Wallingford Castle in a final attempt to take this major Angevin stronghold.[210] The fall of Wallingford appeared imminent and Henry marched south in an attempt to relieve the siege, arriving with a small army and placing Stephen's besieging forces under siege themselves.[211] Upon news of this, Stephen gathered up a large force and marched from Oxford, and the two sides confronted each other across the River Thames at Wallingford in July.[211] By this point in the war, the barons on both sides seem to have been eager to avoid an open battle.[212] As a result, instead of a battle ensuing, members of the church brokered a truce, to the annoyance of both Stephen and Henry.[212]
 In the aftermath of Wallingford, Stephen and Henry spoke together privately about a potential end to the war; Stephen's son Eustace was furious about the peaceful outcome at Wallingford. He left his father and returned home to Cambridge to gather more funds for a fresh campaign, where he fell ill and died the next month.[213] Eustace's death removed an obvious claimant to the throne and was politically convenient for those seeking a permanent peace in England. It is possible that Stephen had already begun to consider passing over Eustace's claim; historian Edmund King observes that Eustace's claim to the throne was not mentioned in the discussions at Wallingford, for example, and this may have added to Stephen's son's anger.[214]
 Fighting continued after Wallingford, but in a rather half-hearted fashion. Stephen lost the towns of Oxford and Stamford to Henry while the king was diverted fighting Hugh Bigod in the east of England, but Nottingham Castle survived an Angevin attempt to capture it.[215] Meanwhile, Stephen's brother Henry of Blois and Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury were for once unified in an effort to broker a permanent peace between the two sides, putting pressure on Stephen to accept a deal.[216] Stephen and Henry FitzEmpress's armies met again at Winchester, where the two leaders would ratify the terms of a permanent peace in November.[217] Stephen announced the Treaty of Winchester in Winchester Cathedral: he recognised Henry FitzEmpress as his adopted son and successor, in return for Henry doing homage to him; Stephen promised to listen to Henry's advice, but retained all his royal powers; Stephen's remaining son, William, would do homage to Henry and renounce his claim to the throne, in exchange for promises of the security of his lands; key royal castles would be held on Henry's behalf by guarantors whilst Stephen would have access to Henry's castles; and the numerous foreign mercenaries would be demobilised and sent home.[218] Stephen and Henry sealed the treaty with a kiss of peace in the cathedral.[219]
 Stephen's decision to recognise Henry as his heir was, at the time, not necessarily a final solution to the civil war.[220] Despite the issuing of new currency and administrative reforms, Stephen might potentially have lived for many more years, whilst Henry's position on the continent was far from secure.[220] Although Stephen's son William was young and unprepared to challenge Henry for the throne in 1153, the situation could well have shifted in subsequent years—there were widespread rumours during 1154 that William planned to assassinate Henry, for example.[221] Historian Graham White describes the treaty of Winchester as a "precarious peace", capturing the judgement of most modern historians that the situation in late 1153 was still uncertain and unpredictable.[222] Nonetheless, Stephen burst into activity in early 1154, travelling around the kingdom extensively.[223] He began issuing royal writs for the south-west of England once again and travelled to York where he held a major court in an attempt to impress upon the northern barons that royal authority was being reasserted.[221] In 1154, Stephen travelled to Dover to meet the Count of Flanders; some historians believe that the king was already ill and preparing to settle his family affairs.[224] Stephen fell ill with a stomach disorder and died on 25 October.[224]
 Henry did not feel it necessary to hurry back to England immediately. On landing on 8 December 1154, Henry quickly took oaths of loyalty from some of the barons and was then crowned alongside Eleanor at Westminster.[225] The royal court was gathered in April 1155, where the barons swore fealty to the king and his sons.[225] Henry presented himself as the legitimate heir to Henry I and commenced rebuilding the kingdom in his image.[226] Although Stephen had tried to continue Henry I's method of government during the war, the new government characterised the 19 years of Stephen's reign as a chaotic and troubled period, with all these problems resulting from Stephen's usurpation of the throne.[227] Henry was also careful to show that, unlike his mother the Empress, he would listen to the advice and counsel of others.[228] Various measures were immediately carried out, although, since Henry spent six and a half of the first eight years of his reign in France, much work had to be done at a distance.[229]
 England had suffered extensively during the war. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded how "there was nothing but disturbance and wickedness and robbery".[230] Certainly in many parts of the country, such as the South-West, the Thames Valley and East Anglia, the fighting and raiding had caused serious devastation.[231] The previously centralised royal coinage system was fragmented, with Stephen, the Empress and local lords all minting their own coins.[231] The royal forest law had collapsed in large parts of the country.[232] Some parts of the country, though, were barely touched by the conflict—for example, Stephen's lands in the south-east and the Angevin heartlands around Gloucester and Bristol were largely unaffected, and David I ruled his territories in the north of England effectively.[231] The king's overall income from his estates declined seriously during the conflict, particularly after 1141, and royal control over the minting of new coins remained limited outside of the south-east and East Anglia.[233] With Stephen often based in the south-east, increasingly Westminster, rather than the older site of Winchester, was used as the centre of royal government.[234]
 Among Henry's first measures was to expel the remaining foreign mercenaries and continue the process of demolishing the unauthorised castles.[235][nb 15] Robert of Torigni recorded that 375 were destroyed, without giving the details behind the figure; recent studies of selected regions have suggested that fewer castles were probably destroyed than once thought and that many may simply have been abandoned at the end of the conflict.[235] Henry also gave a high priority to restoring the royal finances, reviving Henry I's financial processes and attempting to improve the standard of the accounts.[236] By the 1160s, this process of financial recovery was essentially complete.[237]
 The post-war period also saw a surge of activity around the English borders. The king of Scotland and local Welsh rulers had taken advantage of the long civil war in England to seize disputed lands; Henry set about reversing this trend.[238] In 1157 pressure from Henry resulted in the young Malcolm IV of Scotland returning the lands in the north of England he had taken during the war; Henry promptly began to refortify the northern frontier.[239] Restoring Anglo-Norman supremacy in Wales proved harder, and Henry had to fight two campaigns in north and south Wales in 1157 and 1158 before the Welsh princes Owain Gwynedd and Rhys ap Gruffydd submitted to his rule, agreeing to the pre-civil war division of lands.[240]
 Much of the modern history of the civil war of the Anarchy is based on accounts of chroniclers who lived in, or close to, the middle of the 12th century, forming a relatively rich account of the period.[241] All of the main chronicler accounts carry significant regional biases in how they portray the disparate events. Several of the key chronicles were written in the south-west of England, including the Gesta Stephani, or "Acts of Stephen", and William of Malmesbury's Historia Novella, or "New History".[242] In Normandy, Orderic Vitalis wrote his Ecclesiastical History, covering the period until 1141, and Robert of Torigni wrote a later history of the rest of the later years.[242] Henry of Huntingdon, who lived in the east of England, produced the Historia Anglorum that provides a regional account of the conflict.[243] The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was past its prime by the time of the war, but the version maintained at Peterborough Abbey (today known as the Peterborough Chronicle) is remembered for its striking account of conditions during the Anarchy, in particular its description that "men said openly that Christ and his saints were asleep".[244] Most of the chronicles carry some bias for or against the key political figures in the conflict.[245]
 The use of the term "the Anarchy" to describe the civil war has been subject to much critical discussion. The phrase itself originates in the late Victorian period. Many historians of the time traced a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England over the medieval period.[246] William Stubbs, following in this "Whiggish" tradition, analysed the political aspects of the period in his 1874 volume the Constitutional History of England. This work highlighted an apparent break in the development of the English constitution in the 1140s, and caused his student John Round to coin the term "the Anarchy" to describe the period.[247] Later historians critiqued the term, as analysis of the financial records and other documents from the period suggested that the breakdown in law and order during the conflict had been more nuanced and localised than chronicler accounts alone might have suggested.[248] Further work in the 1990s reinterpreted Henry's efforts in the post-war reconstruction period, suggesting a greater level of continuity with Stephen's wartime government than had previously been supposed.[249] The label of "the Anarchy" remains in use by modern historians, but rarely without qualification.[250]
 The civil war years of the Anarchy have been occasionally used in historical fiction. Stephen, Matilda and their supporters feature in Ellis Peters' historical detective series about Brother Cadfael, set between 1137 and 1145.[251] Peters' depiction of the civil war is an essentially local narrative, focused on Shrewsbury and its environs.[251] Peters paints Stephen as a tolerant man and a reasonable ruler, despite his execution of the Shrewsbury defenders after taking the town in 1138.[252] In contrast, Ken Follett's historical novel The Pillars of the Earth and the TV mini-series based on it depict Stephen as an incapable ruler. Although Follett begins his book with Austin Poole's account of the White Ship's sinking to set the historical scene for the subsequent events, in many other ways Follett uses the war as a location for a story about essentially modern personalities and issues, a feature reproduced in the epic costume TV adaptation.[253]

 "Anarchy in the U.K." is a song by English punk rock band the Sex Pistols. It was released as the band's debut single on 26 November 1976 and was later featured on their album Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols. "Anarchy in the U.K." was number 56 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time[1] and is included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll.[2]
 Originally issued in a plain black sleeve, the single was the only Sex Pistols recording released by EMI, and it reached number 38 on the UK Singles Chart before EMI dropped the group on 6 January 1977, a month after members of the band used profanity during a live television broadcast. (Although the EMI version was recorded on 17 October 1976, an earlier demo version was recorded between 10 and 12 October at Lansdowne/Wessex Studios, London. This version later surfaced on the Sex Pistols bootleg album Spunk).
 In 2007, the surviving members (not including original Pistols bassist Glen Matlock) re-recorded "Anarchy in the U.K." for the video game Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock because the multi-track master could not be found[3] (it was rediscovered along with the rest of the Never Mind The Bollocks masters during a move in January 2012[4]). The Guitar Hero version also appears in the film adaption of the A-Team. The song was also featured in the video game Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 as part of the soundtrack.[5] The song also appears in the Constantine TV series during the episode "The Devil's Vinyl".[6]
 A limited edition 7" picture disc of the single was released on 21 April 2012 for that year's Record Store Day.[7][8] In June 2022, a test pressing of the single that belonged to John Peel sold for more than £20,000 at auction.[9]
 In the documentary The Filth and the Fury, John Lydon described the composition of the song's opening lyrics, explaining that the best rhyme he could devise for the first line, "I am an Antichrist", was the second line, "I am an anarchiste". (Lydon confirmed that he is not an anarchist in a 2012 interview.[13])
 Sex Pistols manager Malcolm McLaren considered the song "a call to arms to the kids who believe that rock and roll was taken away from them. It's a statement of self rule, of ultimate independence."[14]
 The abbreviations used in the lyrics are a selection of civil war references from 1970s headlines, a suggestion of what could happen in the United Kingdom. The IRA and the UDA were the largest paramilitary armies in the conflict in Northern Ireland: the heavily armed IRA (Irish Republican Army) were on the Republican (anti-British, pro-unification) side, and the thousands-strong UDA (Ulster Defence Association) were on the Loyalist (pro-British, anti-unification) side. The MPLA (Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola, or the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola) were the political party that took control of Angola, formerly one of Portugal's African colonies, in a 1975–1976 civil war, and still run the country today. When Rotten sings "I use the enemy", it's a deliberate homonym for "I use the NME", or New Musical Express, the British weekly music newspaper.[15][16]
 ‡ Sales+streaming figures based on certification alone.
 An alternative recording of the song in 34 time, accompanied by violin and accordion, apparently both translated into French and sung by a mysterious figure called Louis Brennon (also named as Jerzimy in some sources), appeared on the Sex Pistols' 1979 album The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle.[21][22]
 "Anarchy in the U.K." was covered by American thrash metal band Megadeth for their third album So Far, So Good... So What!, released in 1988.
 Megadeth's version has altered lyrics. Dave Mustaine explained that he could not understand Johnny Rotten's singing, so he made up the parts he could not understand (in a notable example, the line "another council tenancy" is changed to "and other cunt-like tendencies"). In addition, the country is changed to "USA", though the title is kept unchanged. The song's music video is a montage of live footage of the band, cartoon political figures, various scenes of violence, and of a man being forced to watch (much like Alex's therapy in A Clockwork Orange). Steve Jones played the second solo.
 Mustaine now refuses to play the song live due to lyrics referring to the Anti-Christ, and he believes he's "better for it".[24]
 Green Jellÿ's version of "Anarchy in the U.K." is a parody cover of the original with added Flintstones references. The song originally appeared as "Anarchy in Bedrock" on Green Jellÿ's (then Green Jellö's) Triple Live Möther Gööse at Budokan album. William Hanna and Joseph Barbera took offence to this version and to Green Jellÿ mocking The Flintstones but later relented, as this version was featured on the soundtrack to the Flintstones film that was released in 1994.
 Pete Stanton from Smash Hits gave the Green Jellÿ version five out of five, writing, "They've followed the insanity of Three Little Pigs with more madness, littering a great song wit "Yabadabadoo"s and an eardrum bursting "Wiiillmmaaaa" at the end. Get into Green Jelly quick before a doctor slips them into strait-jackets, shoves them into a room and locks the door."[28]
 American heavy metal band Mötley Crüe covered the song on their 1991 compilation album Decade of Decadence, substituting US analogies and organizations in the lyrics for UK ones. It was also their last song with lead singer Vince Neil until 1997's Generation Swine.

 The following is a list of characters from Sons of Anarchy, and its spin-off Mayans M.C. Both are American crime drama television series created by Kurt Sutter. Sons of Anarchy aired from 2008 to 2014, Mayans M.C. from 2018 to 2023.
 Jackson Nathaniel 'Jax' Teller (Charlie Hunnam), is a member of the titular motorcycle club and the main protagonist of the series. He spends the majority of the show's lifespan as the vice president of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club's Redwood Original (SAMCRO) mother charter based in Charming, California; following season four, he assumes the presidency for the remainder of the series.
 Ezekiel 'E.Z.' Reyes (J. D. Pardo) is the protagonist on the FX television series Mayans M.C..[1][2] A member of the titular motorcycle club, he is a Prospect for the majority of the first two seasons of the series. The brother of club member Angel Reyes, E.Z. becomes a full patch member by the end of the second season. And later gets promoted to Vice-President and then President. E.Z. also has an eidetic memory, and can vividly remember childhood memories.[3][4][5] Pardo had to go through a transformation for the role, including gaining muscle.[6]
 Gemma Teller-Morrow (Katey Sagal) is the queen of Charming under Clay's rule and also the main female character from the show. A Machiavellian schemer and expert in psychological manipulation, Gemma is the wife of Clay Morrow, the widow of John Teller and mother of Jax Teller. Gemma also made a guest appearance in Mayans M.C..
 Robert 'Bobby Elvis' Munson (Mark Boone Junior) is the treasury secretary of SAMCRO. He later becomes vice president when Jax takes over as president. Bobby is intelligent and even-tempered (an uncommon trait among his club-mates), but unafraid of using violence when necessary. Munson's father was an accountant in Reno, Nevada, and kept two sets of books for the Mafia. Bobby apparently learned accounting from him. He is Jewish and does Elvis Presley impersonations in Lake Tahoe, leading to him sometimes being referred to as "Bobby Elvis". He is the Treasurer Secretary of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club's Charming, California chapter. This means that he is responsible for all of the club's financial matters and record keeping.[7] As one of the club's calmer members, he frequently finds himself having to try to calm tensions among his brothers, particularly during Season 2. It was revealed by Juice Ortiz in season 6 that Bobby started out in the SOA Nomad charter, presumably after prospecting for the SOA Reno Chapter.
 He is murdered by August Marks after being taken hostage and having his eye cut out and fingers cut off and delivered to Jax. He is a victim of Gemma's lies about how Tara died.
 Alexander 'Tig' Trager (Kim Coates) is the Vice President and former Sergeant-at-Arms of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club's Charming, California charter and is the club's most violent member. During the first four seasons of the show, he wore the "Sgt. at Arms" patch on his cut and after season seven, he wears the "V. President" patch. He is extremely loyal to Clay Morrow, the club's president, Clay's wife Gemma, and the club itself. He has at times had a strained relationship with the then Vice President Jax Teller, arising from Trager's use of violence in situations which may not call for it.
 Not much is mentioned about Trager's past, but it is likely that he is a native of Charming and that he has served time in prison. It is explained in a behind-the-scenes video from Season One that he was a U.S. Marine.[8] He is in his late 40s or early 50s and was the Sergeant-at-Arms of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club's Mother Charter, the responsibilities of which include: to ensure proper employment, defense, and enforcement of club rules, charter bylaws, and charter decrees, and imposition of penalties for violations thereof are observed, executed, and fulfilled. His "day job" is working as a mechanic at the Teller-Morrow Automotive Repair shop, and he is often used by the gang to carry out killings. He has two daughters, named Dawn and Fawn, whom he sees a couple of times each year.[9] He suffers from acute pediophobia, a fear of dolls, which Sons of Anarchy creator Kurt Sutter actually has. In the Season One episode "Old Bones", he explicitly says that he is a necrophiliac, and describes to Clay what he likes about it, while at the morgue. It remains unclear whether Tig was being serious, or simply used the opportunity to enhance his reputation for embracing the gruesome and the macabre. Several times he is hinted to have a proclivity for other paraphilias. Despite a perhaps depraved love of violence, Tig also shows sensitivity when it comes to women, children, and animals, taking revenge against those who exploit them. In season 5, Tig becomes a pet owner after rescuing an American Pit Bull Terrier who lost her fight, from being shot. Tig is frequently employed in situations where the use of violence is needed.  Far from shying away, Tig actually seems to enjoy and covet his position as an enforcer, relishing the art of dirty fighting and the use of sudden, vicious, and often extreme violence. A trademark tactic is for him to bite off a piece of flesh from a rival during a fight.[citation needed].
 Filip 'Chibs' Telford (Tommy Flanagan), succeeded Jackson "Jax" Teller as SAMCRO president after stints as vice president and sergeant at arms. Chibs was born in Scotland and grew up in Belfast, Northern Ireland. He is a former member of the Real IRA and Sons of Anarchy's Belfast charter, aka SAMBEL. He is the club member to have held the most positions. On his colors, he wore the following patches: "Sgt. at Arms", "V. President", "Sons of Anarchy" and like Jax, the "In Memory of Opie" patch. Chibs is extremely loyal to Jax Teller and the club; he also has a good relationship with Tig Trager, Half-Sack Epps (a prospect he sponsored), and Juice Ortiz, with whom he has a fatherlike relationship, which ends after Juice's eventual betrayal of the club.
 Chibs is SAMCRO's connection with the IRA, which sells guns to organized crime groups within the United States. He is originally from Glasgow, Scotland, but grew up in Belfast, Northern Ireland[10] and is heard speaking  Scottish Gaelic.[citation needed] As he tells IRA member Cameron Hayes, whom he patches up after Cameron is shot, Chibs served as a medic with the British Army for five months before being court-martialed.
 Chibs was excommunicated from the IRA by the group's leader, Jimmy O'Phelan, who out of jealousy scarred Chibs' face, told him never to return to Ireland, stole Chibs' wife Fiona Larkin (who, as shown in Season 2 remains married to and still loves, but is estranged from Chibs), and raised Chibs and Fiona's daughter, Kerrianne.  Chibs then joined SAMBEL in Ireland until he transferred to SAMCRO in the United States, whose Charming charter has Real IRA links via the club's Belfast charter.
 Chibs also appears in Mayans M.C..
 Edward Kip 'Half-Sack' Epps (whom Cherry calls Kip and Tig sometimes calls Kippy) (Johnny Lewis) is nicknamed Half-Sack because he lost his right testicle in the Iraq War. He is a prospect in seasons 1–2, tasked with doing all menial jobs SAMCRO members don't want to do. He's not overly bright (he stores a bloody deer's head under the club's pool table with the intention of mounting it on the wall, but doesn't understand when Jax says it has to be stuffed). He's loyal, brave, obedient, and earns Jax's trust. Half-Sack is a lightweight boxing champion, and in season 1 the club earns money from purses and bets on Half-Sack in order to buy guns from the Irish.
 Kip Epps served in the United States Army during the Iraq War. He lost a testicle while serving in Iraq, prompting the nickname "Half Sack". A surprisingly formidable fighter, he was also the Junior Lightweight Champion of the Armed Forces boxing competition. After leaving the military, he began prospecting for the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club and worked as a mechanic at Teller-Morrow Automotive Repair. He is also a vegetarian.
 Dr. Tara Knowles-Teller (Maggie Siff) is Jax's main love interest. She moves back to Charming shortly before the events of the series. In season 5, Jax and Tara become husband and wife. She is also the mother of his son Thomas and stepmother to Abel.
 Clarence 'Clay' Morrow (Ron Perlman) is a First 9 member of SAMCRO. He starts off the series as president. He is the stepfather to Jax Teller and the second husband to Gemma. His actions throughout the series have severe effects on both the club and his family.
 Harry 'Opie' Winston (Ryan Hurst) is the son of SAMCRO co-founder Piney, and the best friend of Jax Teller since childhood. Opie's mother took him away from Piney and Charming when he was 16, but he left her and returned to his father and the club. While married to Donna, Opie is sent to prison for five years after being caught by police when his getaway driver (Kyle Hobart) abandoned him at a crime scene, thus leaving Opie's wife and two children, Ellie and Kenny, to fend for themselves during his incarceration. Upon his release, Opie's family has difficulty making ends meet, which contributes to Opie's decision to resume illegal activity with SAMCRO, against Donna's wishes. After Donna is murdered, Lyla forms a relationship with Opie, who ultimately marries her. Opie purposely gets himself sent back to prison to help protect Jax and sacrifices himself when Pope wants one of the Sons dead. He is given a final farewell in the clubhouse with all of SAMCRO honouring him.
 Piermont 'Piney' Winston (William Lucking) co-founded SAMCRO, and was the club's first vice president. He is the father of Opie, was a Vietnam veteran, and must carry an oxygen tank due to emphysema. His patches have included: First 9, Redwood and Original.
 Winston was in his late 60s and served as a Soldier in the U.S. Army 25th Infantry Division during the Vietnam War. When he returned to his hometown of Charming, California, in 1967, he felt ostracized by the same society he had just risked his life for. He eventually co-founded the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club with fellow war veteran John Teller as a form of social rebellion and freedom. He was JT's vice president until he was diagnosed with emphysema in 1991. He then suffered from severe emphysema and had to carry an oxygen tank with him at all times, which prevent his going out on runs, but he still attended "Church". Piney’s emphysema is implied to have been caused by years of smoking, and he is often seen holding and smelling unlit cigarettes during sit-downs. Despite his age he proved to be just as tough as his younger club brothers. Piney is the father of Harry "Opie" Winston, Jax Teller's best friend and another member of the Sons of Anarchy. Piney was the only contemporary SAMCRO (Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club Redwood Original) member to wear the original Sons of Anarchy denim kutte.[11] He is a heavy drinker, even more so than the other club members, with his preferred liquor being Patrón.
 Juan-Carlos 'Juice' Ortiz (Theo Rossi) is SAMCRO's hacker and intelligence officer. Though Juice displays great technical prowess in some respects, he has also proven to be somewhat simple minded when it comes to other tasks, often garnering him hazing from the other members. His storyline grows after law enforcement see him as the Club's weak link; in seasons 5-6 the Club becomes aware of his betrayals. On his colours, he wears the "Men of Mayhem" patch. He is one of three characters killed in the series' penultimate episode, "Red Rose," along with Wayne Unser and Gemma Teller Morrow.
 Ortiz is of Puerto Rican and African-American descent, and is from Queens, New York. Ortiz's sponsor was Jax Teller (season 2). He was seen as unreliable by Clay Morrow, and is often given menial tasks, such as driving the transport truck. He sports a short mohawk and has matching tribal designs tattooed on each side of his head.[12] According to Gemma Teller Morrow, Ortiz has a sister in Queens, although their relationship seems to be very distant. 
 He is a young and relatively new member of SAMCRO; he is close with Chibs Telford and Tig Trager, and it's suggested that he was sponsored by Jax as a prospect.
 He develops depression and anxiety which results in a suicide attempt.
 Chief Wayne Unser (Dayton Callie) is the chief of the Charming Police Department. He also owns Unser Shipping trucking company, and is not above using the SOA for protection and other questionable activities related to his business. He is an ally of Clay Morrow, as well as a USMC Veteran of the Vietnam War.
 Despite serving as chief of police, Unser's ties to SAMCRO tighten over the course of the series. This is most evident when he helps the club to kill corrupt ATF Agent June Stahl and club nemesis Jimmy O'Phalen. Unser is ousted as Chief of Police when the city decides to let the county sheriffs take over policing duties. Unser eventually grows very close with the Teller family and SAMCRO, frequently intervening in problems to find acceptable solutions and helping prevent infighting among members. Unser ends up retiring, but due to the expenses of his cancer treatment is forced to sell his house and business, and moves into a trailer. Ever since, he is often seen helping the Teller family in many tasks. He also uses his connections to aid the club in avoiding law enforcement investigations and gang warfare.
 Conflicting loyalties within the Teller family and the club eventually convince Unser to rejoin law enforcement as an ad hoc investigator for Lt. Althea Jarry of the San Joaquin County Sheriffs Department. Unser goes to these extreme measures in hopes of finally stopping all the bloodshed the club is causing and suffering from. In the penultimate episode of the series, Jax Teller kills Wayne while he is trying to arrest Gemma Teller-Morrow (to prevent her son Jax from killing her).
 Wendy Case (Drea de Matteo) is Jax Teller's ex-wife and Abel Teller's biological mother. Shortly after Jax breaks up with her, she intentionally becomes pregnant in the hope that it would keep Jax with her. She was a meth[13] addict during her pregnancy, which nearly killed Abel who was born ten weeks premature with a hereditary heart malfunction and a tear in his abdominal wall.
 Drea de Matteo is a supporting cast member for the majority of her time on the series. She was promoted to main cast billing for the seventh and last season.[14][15]
 Happy 'Hap' Lowman (David LaBrava) is SAMCRO's Sergeant-at-Arms beginning in season 6. His birth name is Happy which is based on Happy Loman from Arthur Miller's play Death of a Salesman. Lowman is played by real-life Hells Angel David Labrava.[16][17][18] Happy Lowman portrays the enforcer as a member of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club along with being affiliated with the Tacoma, Washington SOA charter but later becomes a nomad (has no permanent charter). In the episode titled "The Push", Happy is patched in as an official member of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club- Redwood Original (SAMCRO) charter. He along with Tig Trager, are commonly used to carry out the club's dirty work. He is from Tacoma, Washington but frequently visits the club's charter in Charming, California where he has a good relationship with the President, Clay Morrow. Hap mentions that his mother is from Bakersfield, California. A heartless assassin, he has been shown to enjoy acts of violence that even other members of the club are disturbed by. Despite the toughness he regularly displays, he is depicted in the show at times as being emotional and not just when a club member dies. He has a Smiley (happy face) tattooed on him every time he kills someone.
 Happy also appears in Mayans M.C., first in the first season finale "Cuervo/Tz'ikb'uul", wherein it is revealed Happy killed Marisol Reyes, the mother of the series protagonist Ezekiel "EZ" Reyes and his brother Angel Reyes. EZ comes closer to cracking into Happy's involvement with killing operations for SAMCRO, including the murder of his own mother. EZ reveals the truth to his brother Angel about their mother's death and that he got information on the side about Happy, and his history with SAMCRO. Angel and EZ travel to Charming and break into Happy's house, holding him at gunpoint. The Reyes brothers try to get answers from a tied up Happy, but he refuses to speak until they threaten his dog, Opie. He explains the hit was for both their parents and that the order came from Mexico. He promises to get more information from his contact and that they will be even. In the season five episode "My Eyes Filled and Then Closed on the Last of Childhood Tears", EZ and Angel find the whereabouts of Happy and kill him.
 George 'Ratboy' Skogstrom (Niko Nicotera) is originally introduced as a prospect during Season 4. He becomes a patched member and is often entrusted to look after Gemma and the other women.
 Neron 'Nero' Padilla (Jimmy Smits) is a Mexican-American pimp (who refers to himself as a "companionator") and the head of a Mexican gang known as the Byz Lats. In the Season 5 premiere, he is shown to have bonded with Gemma Teller. In "Authority Vested", he provides sanctuary to the Sons, who hide out at his brothel, Diosa, when SAMCRO is under attack and planning their next move. Over the next few episodes, Nero forms an alliance with Jax Teller and offers mentorly advice, such as how to deal with Gemma (in "Toad's Wild Ride"). Nero has a young son who is disabled and lives in a home.
 Mayans M.C. takes place in the same fictional universe as Sons of Anarchy and deals with the Sons' rivals-turned-allies then rivals once again, the Mayans Motorcycle Club.
 Angel Reyes (Clayton Cardenas), is EZ's brother and Él Secretario of the Mayans, Santo Padre Charter.[19]
 Emily Thomas (Sarah Bolger), is the childhood sweetheart of EZ, who is now married to Miguel Galindo, and the mother of their infant son.[19]
 Obispo 'Bishop' Losa (Michael Irby), is president of the Mayans Santo Padre Charter.[20]
 Adelita (Carla Baratta), who as a child, watched her family die at the hands of the Galindo cartel.[20]
 Johnny 'El Coco' Cruz (Richard Cabral) is a full patch member of Mayans M.C.[21]
 Gilberto 'Gilly' Lopez (Vincent “Rocco” Vargas), A former U.S. Army Ranger, good-natured Mixed martial arts fighter, and a full patch member of Mayans M.C., Santo Padre Charter
 Che 'Taza' Romero (Raoul Trujillo), Vice Presidente of Mayans M.C., Santo Padre Charter.[20]
 Neron 'Creeper' Vargas (Joseph Lucero) a full patch member of Mayans M.C. and "Road Captain" of the Santo Padre Charter.
 Michael 'Riz' Ariza (Antonio Jaramillo) is a full patch member of Mayans M.C.[20]
 Miguel Galindo (Danny Pino) is the son of Galindo Cartel founder Jose Galindo, and is the illegitimate son of Felipe, making him a half-brother to Ezekiel and Angel Reyes.[19]
 Felipe Reyes (Edward James Olmos) is the once-strong Mexican patriarch and Angel and EZ's father.[22]
 Marcus Álvarez (Emilio Rivera) is the president of the Mayans Motorcycle Club, an Oakland-based rival motorcycle club that has allied itself with the Nords in order to break SAMCRO's iron-fisted control over Charming. He and the Mayans are bitter rivals with the Niners gang.
 Álvarez, who is of Mexican descent, seems to be the Mayans national president. His son, Esai, was also a member of the club but had a hit placed on him by Marcus in 2008 as punishment for failing his mission. Most of his, and his gang's, income is made through dealing heroin and methamphetamine, and prostitution. For some time, he was a prisoner in Chino, but was released some time before the beginning of Season 1 of Sons of Anarchy. On his colors, he wears patches reading "Los Asesinos de Dios" (Spanish for "God's Assassins") and "Mayans Oakland". However, his "President" patch is later changed to "El Padrino". He also has the Mayan Calendar tattooed on his chest.
 Álvarez also appears in the spin-off Mayans M.C., now wearing an "El Padrino" patch (which in English translates to "The Godfather"), he goes down to Santo Padre Charter with members of the Mayans Motorcycle Club's Oakland, California charter to help the Santo Padre charter deal with the Galindo Cartel. It is revealed that he and José Galindo; the founder of the Cartel, had a mutual respect for one another. Álvarez later suspects that a mule in the Santo Padre charter is working with Los Olvidados ("The Forgotten Ones"). In the first season finale, Álvarez steps down as Padrino to work with the Galindo Cartel directly as Miguel's newly appointed advisor.
 Gabriela 'Gaby' Castillo (Sulem Calderon) newly immigrated to the U.S. from Oaxaca, Mexico, she seeks to build a brighter future for herself and her family. After moving to Santo Padre, she starts a relationship with EZ until she leaves for Lodi to attend nursing school.
 Leticia Cruz (Emily Tosta) is Coco's daughter who was raised by her grandmother Celia for most of her life believing she was his younger sister.
 Neron 'Creeper' Vargas (Joseph Raymond Lucero), an ex-junkie from Los Angeles and a full patch member of the Mayans M.C., Santo Padre Charter and its former Capitan Del Camino (Road Captain). After an investigation into the Mayans' activities by the ATF, he covers for the club and is incarcerated, but maintains club membership.
 Gilberto 'Gilly' Lopez (Vincent Vargas), a good-natured mixed martial arts (MMA) fighter, former U.S. Army Ranger, and a full patch member and later Capitan Del Camino of the Mayans M.C., Santo Padre Charter
 Isaac Packer (JR Bourne, the President of SAMDINO and a former Nomad who became the leader of a drug community based outside of Santo Padre at an encampment dubbed "Meth Mountain". He was previously ex-communicated from SAMDINO by his older brother and former President, Les Packer due to his unstable nature.
 Orlin West a.k.a. "West" (Douglas Bennett) is one of the three Sons Bobby recruited into the Redwood Original Charter in season 6. He was killed at the port warehouse by Lin's men in season 7 while guarding the guns the Sons had stolen from Lin.
 'Go-Go' (Chris Browning), a Nomad who comes to Charming, appears in season 5 and is voted into the club when the Nomad charter closes. He, Frankie, and Greg the Peg are working for Clay and are behind the break-ins and attacks. GoGo is killed by Unser with a double-barrel shotgun when he and Greg the Peg go to kill Unser, unaware that Clay is there and has double-crossed them.
 Greg 'The Peg' (Kurt Yaeger) is a Nomad who is missing a leg. He appears in season 5, when he and two other Nomads – Frankie, and GoGo – come to Charming when the Nomad chapter closes, and are voted into SAMCRO. Greg, Frankie, and GoGo are working for Clay and are behind the home invasion attacks. Clay kills Greg by shooting him in the head, when Greg and GoGo attempt to kill Unser, unaware that Clay is there and has double-crossed them.
 Frankie 'Diamonds' (Chuck Zito), a New York Nomad who comes to Charming, appears in season 5 and is voted into the club when the Nomad charter closes. He, GoGo, and Greg the Peg work for Clay and are behind the attacks and break-ins. Frankie kidnaps Nero and requests $200,000 from the club from the "cartel money." Nero hands over $130,000 in cash and a couple of "nice watches" as payment, in an effort to get Frankie to leave. Frankie shoots Opie's wife Lyla, and takes Chibs as a hostage. He eventually leaves Charming with Mafia protection and is murdered by the same men he thought would protect him, before giving up Clay as the source of the home invasions.
 Kyle Hobart (Brian Van Holt) is excommunicated from the club after abandoning Opie during an arson job, leading to Opie's five-year incarceration. With Clay's blessing, he returns to Charming to see his teenage son, Charlie Hobart (William F. Nicol), and ends up trying to offer SAMCRO a business deal involving stolen goods to serve as repayment for his past mistake. Opie confronts Kyle and the two settle their beef, but Kyle has failed to perform the club mandate to remove his Sons of Anarchy back tattoo, so he is given a choice of removal methods ("fire or knife?"). Choosing fire, the tattoo is burned off Kyle's back with a cutting torch. He loses consciousness during the process, and it is unknown if Kyle is still alive after being left on the steps of St. Thomas Hospital, where his ex-wife, April Hobart (Liane Curtis), is waiting to aid him after being tipped off by Gemma that Kyle would likely need medical care.
 Herman Kozik (Kenny Johnson) is a member of the Tacoma chapter of the Sons of Anarchy. He first appeared in the Season 2 episode "The Culling" where he provided extra muscle when the Charming clubhouse was on lockdown. He is a former US Marine and an ex-junkie. He appeared again in the Season 3 premiere at Half-Sack's wake, where he told Clay and Bobby that he wanted to come back to the Charming chapter. When Kozik showed up at SAMCRO with transfer papers, Tig vetoed the vote due to lack of trust. Kozik then decided to stick around to earn Tig's trust. He and Piney lured the Mayans' heroin shipment into SAMCRO's hands after flattening the van's tire. Later Kozik and Tig snuck into St. Thomas to silence the Calaveras member from the drive-by as part of SAMCRO's new deal with the Mayans. Kozik has a contentious relationship with Tig and in episode 3.8, Tig states that it involves a female from both of their pasts. When Tara Knowles and Margaret Murphy are taken hostage, Kozik proves to be useful. When Salazar demands that the club kill Marcus Alvarez, Kozik is the one who convinces Alvarez to play along to help buy time so SAMCRO can find a way to get the women back. Following Tara's rescue, Tig once again votes against Kozik's transfer. It is revealed that the "woman" from both of their pasts was a female dog named Missy. In season 4, Kozik is revealed to have been patched into SAMCRO after Tig went to Stockton Prison, a fact Tig happily accepts upon being released. He was killed in the episode "Call of Duty" by stepping on a landmine that exploded while fighting the cartel; his last words were "You gotta be shittin' me".
 Eric Miles a.k.a. "Miles" (Frank Potter) is SAMCRO's newest patched-in member. He is introduced in the episode "The Push" as a prospect. Miles assists the club with tasks such as cleaning the clubhouse, providing backup when they break into Salazar's house, and watching Gemma to make sure she doesn't leave the clubhouse when she is hiding from the law. Miles is murdered by Juice to cover up what really happened with the stolen cocaine from the warehouse.
 John Thomas 'J.T.' Teller (May 5, 1940 – November 13, 1993) (voiced by Nicholas Guest) founded the Sons of Anarchy with Piney Winston and was the club's first president. He was Gemma's first husband, and they had two children together, Jax and Thomas. Thomas "Tommy" Teller (January 8, 1984[23] – April 4, 1990), died from a congenital heart defect at six years of age. He also fathered an illegitimate daughter, Trinity, with Maureen Ashby during an extended sojourn in Belfast. As Jax reiterates to Opie in Season 2, episode 10 ("Balm"), J.T. died from injuries sustained from a vehicular accident while riding on I-580 in California. Gemma states in an earlier episode and is shown in a Charming Police Department report in Season 4, episode 2 ("Booster"): after J.T.'s Harley was "sideswiped" by a semi-trailer truck on November 11, 1993, at 13:54; J.T. was dragged 178 yards, taken to St. Thomas Hospital, and died two days later. His home address on the police report is 8824 Sandy Creek in Charming, California. Deputy Chief Wayne Unser signed the report. In season 4, episode 5 ("Brick"), Unser says Clay killed J.T. and had Unser cover it up; Clay responds he merely asked Unser to "lose a little paperwork". Unser retorts that J.T. had written that Clay would make two attempts on his life. In season 7, episode 8 ("Separation of Crows") Jury White says J.T. committed suicide out of guilt for letting SAMCRO become corrupt and deliberately crashed into the semi-trailer, an act of self-sacrifice to protect his club and family from his mistakes. Several times in season 7, SAMCRO members are seen touching the roadside memorial dedicated to J.T. (e.g., in episode 7 "Greensleeves" and episode 13 "Papa's Goods").
 Rane Quinn (Rusty Coones) is the former president of the Nomad Charter. He appears in season 5 to help track down one of his former Nomad soldiers. He becomes a member of the Redwood Original charter.
 Allesandro 'Domingo' Montez (Jacob Vargas) is a member of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club's Reno, NV chapter and later a member of SAMCRO.
 Taddarius Orwell 'T.O.' Cross (Michael Beach) is the former president of the Grim Bastards Motorcycle Club. He is voted in as full member of SAMCRO in the series finale, after Jax makes a pact with the other SOA clubs to abolish the unwritten bylaw prohibiting blacks as members, and the Grim Bastards are patched over.
 Leonard 'Lenny the Pimp' Janowitz (Sonny Barger, a founding member of the Oakland, California chapter of Hells Angels Motorcycle Club). He appeared in episodes of the third, fourth and fifth seasons, and was convicted and jailed for murdering three ATF agents.
 He was also one of the first nine original members, the third person to join.
 Otto 'Big Otto' Delaney (Kurt Sutter, creator of the series) was a member of the Sons of Anarchy's Charming chapter. He was imprisoned in Stockton state prison on charges of second-degree murder and vehicle theft, but is still in contact with the club. He is a powerful man on the inside and is the leader of the "Big House Crew", a gang of imprisoned Sons of Anarchy members. He takes Chucky Marstein under his protection, and arranges, when Chucky is released, to have SAMCRO protect him from Lin. In Season 2, Zobelle has the Aryan Brotherhood severely beat Otto, to "humble" Clay, and in the process the AB puts out Otto's one good eye, leaving him almost blind. Also that season, Otto is heartbroken when Luann is murdered. In Season 6, U.S. Marshal Lee Toric targets Otto, in retaliation for Otto's having killed Toric's sister, and has Otto repeatedly raped and beaten in prison. Clay smuggles Otto a shank, which Otto uses to kill Toric and then to threaten the guards, in order to commit "suicide by cop".
 Phillip 'Filthy Phil' Russell (Christopher Douglas Reed) was one of three new prospects taken on after the death of Kip "Half Sack" Epps. Phil is responsible for guarding the first shipment of cocaine the club receives from the Galindo cartel along with Miles, new prospect Ratboy and Rafi from the Mayans Oakland Chapter. When some of the shipment is stolen, Phil and the other guards are the main suspects despite Juice being the true culprit. Prior to the fifth season, Phil was voted in to be an official member of SAMCRO. In season six, Phil is killed by the IRA.
 'Jury' White (Michael Shamus Wiles) is the former president of the friendly Devil's Tribe Motorcycle Club in Indian Hills, Nevada, which SAMCRO patched over without prior warning in Season 1. Jury and John Teller ("J.T.") had served together in the same platoon in Vietnam and remained close friends afterwards. In season 7, SAMCRO called upon "Indian Hills", and in turn Jury recruited "local muscle", to help take down Lin's gun buy (which turned out to include an exchange of guns for heroin) in Selma, and kill Lin's men and customers. Jax, Chibs, and Bobby later killed the "local muscle", and framed them for the takedown in Selma. When Jax later learns one of the murdered "local muscle", Gib O'Leary, was Jury's son, Jax erroneously assumes Jury took revenge by ratting out SAMCRO to Lin. In season 7, episode 8 ("Separation of Crows"), Jury tells Jax that his father didn't die as rumored, in a motorcycle accident resulting from Clay's having sabotaged his bike (on which John died days after colliding with and being dragged by a semi truck). Rather, Jury said, J.T. deliberately "checked out" (committed suicide), as "That Panhead was an extension of John. He would have known if anything was wrong with it the second he kicked it over. [...] Maybe it was his sacrifice. A way of letting his club and family survive." Jax disagreed, saying: "My old man didn't kill himself." After exchanging further words, Jax knocked down Jury, who dropped his gun. When Jury reached for and grabbed it, Jax killed him with a single shot to the head. That action, witnessed by Jury's VP and  SAMCRO members, and Jax's confession to it, led to Jax's receiving a unanimous Mayhem vote in the series finale ("Papa's Goods").
 'Needles' (Jay Thames) is vice president of the Devil's Tribe Motorcycle Club chapter. He follows Jury in patching over into a Sons of Anarchy chapter.
 Hopper (Steve Howey) is a Sons of Anarchy North Vegas charter member. He is approached by Bobby Munson to join SAMCRO and says he wants in, but changes his mind after being scared off by the bombing of the SAMCRO clubhouse.
 Sometime after the events of season one, Needles is no longer the VP of the Indian Hills charter and has been replaced by Gaines. Gaines is voted in as the charter's president after Jury is killed. Mickey is then voted in as Gaines' new VP.
 Keith McGee (Andy McPhee) was the president of the Sons of Anarchy Belfast chapter (SAMBEL) in Northern Ireland and a member of the First 9.
 Liam O'Neill (Arie Verveen) was the Sergeant-At-Arms of the Belfast charter of the Sons of Anarchy for 10 years and was in a relationship with Cherry.
 Seamus Ryan (Darin Heames) is the current president of SAMBEL. McGee was the original SAMBEL president and Ryan was the SAMBEL vice president during the betrayals and executions of McGee and Sergeant-at-Arms Liam O'Neill. After McGee and O'Neill are executed, Ryan is tapped as president.
 Luther Barkwill (Dominic Keating), is the current vice president of SAMBEL. He was the road captain for the SOA Sunderland, Tyne and Wear chapter and eventually for SAMBEL. Although hesitant at times, he is a quick reactor. An example includes him being hesitant to run the police off the road to prevent them from hauling off SAMCRO, but after Gemma jumped on the accelerator and ran them off the road, Luther jumped out and started firing rapidly.
 Padraic Telford (Lorcan O'Toole), Chibs' nephew, was accidentally killed in an explosion triggered by Liam O'Neill in an attempt to take out SAMCRO.
 Following SAMCRO's arrival in Ireland, in an attempt to bring back Abel, several additional members of the Belfast chapter have appeared on the scene, including  'Geezer' (Jason McDonald), and 'Scrum' (Darren Keefe).
 Armando (Lobo Sebastian), president of the Sons of Anarchy Tucson chapter (SAMTAZ) in Tucson, Arizona, was beheaded by a cartel. The rest of his body was discovered in the back of a truck by the Sons of Anarchy and the Mayans, and his body was sent back to his club in Tucson, along with his head.
 Benny (Rolando Molina), the Sergeant-at-Arms for the Tucson chapter, was kicked out with vice president Huff for blackmailing a fellow member, Reggie, and murdering another member in order to cover up a non-club-sanctioned meth cook shop.
 Huff (Brian Goodman), the vice president of the Tucson chapter, was kicked out for blackmailing a fellow member, 
Reggie, and murdering another member in order to cover up a non-club-sanctioned meth cook shop.
 Reggie (John Bishop), a member of the Sons of Anarchy Tucson chapter (SAMTAZ) in Tucson, Arizona, was caught by former vice president Huff sleeping with another member's wife. Huff used this information to blackmail Reggie in order to cover up a non-club-sanctioned meth cook shop and the murder of another member, who happened to be Reggie's sponsor.
 Paul 'Little Paul', a SAMTAZ member, was murdered by Huff and Benny. Another yet-to-be-named member has also appeared, played by Burton Perez.
 The Sons of Anarchy San Bernardino chapter (SAMDINO) is led by president Les Packer (Robert Patrick), while John Hensley portrayed Yates – the two actors having previously played father and son, David and Eric Scatino, in The Sopranos.
 The Tacoma chapter's president is Lee (Lee "Hamco" Staskunas), while other, still unseen, members include 'Bowie', 'Donut',  and Lorca.
 The yet-to-be-named president of the Oregon chapter (Joe Rose) has made one appearance, as well as a yet-to-be-named nomad member (Eric "Mancow" Muller).
 Lyla Dvorak-Winston (Winter Ave Zoli), a porn star employed by Luann Delaney, is introduced in season 1. She and Opie begin to grow close from the time they meet. A single parent like Opie, she helps him with his children and marries him in the first episode of Season 4. After Opie's death, she continues to raise his children and goes on to run Red Woody in season 7.
 Fiona Larkin (Bellina Logan) is Chibs' estranged wife, introduced in season 2. Fiona first appears at Chibs' bedside when he is hospitalized after nearly being killed by a car bomb. They have a daughter together, and Fiona still loves Chibs, but was taken as Jimmy O's prize after Jimmy banished Chibs from Ireland.
 Precious Ryan (Eileen Grubba) is Bobby's ex-wife and mother of his son.
 Rita 'Cherry' Zambell (Taryn Manning) is a "sweetbutt" (pass around club groupie) from Indian Hills, Nevada, whose real name is Rita Zambell. After leaving her abusive husband and burning down their condo, she aligns herself with the Devil's Tribe. She bonds with Kip "Half-Sack" Epps and eventually becomes his old lady, but SAMCRO sends her to Canada, then Ireland, to escape arrest for arson. She becomes Liam's lover in Ireland.
 Mary Winston (Julie Ariola) is Piney Winston's ex-wife and Opie's mother. She moved away from Charming, leaving Opie with Piney and then filed for divorce. However, she returns to temporarily look after her grandchildren when Opie is arrested. She consoles the distraught Opie after Donna's murder.
 Luann Delaney (Dendrie Taylor) is Gemma's best friend and runs a pornography studio, CaraCara, having received financial backing from Big Otto, her husband. She reluctantly partners with SAMCRO for protection, after her rival Georgie Caruso makes escalating attacks on her business. She begins a sexual relationship with Bobby Munson to buy his silence, after he discovers she has been skimming money from the CaraCara partnership. Ultimately, Georgie has her killed, which devastates Otto.
 Donna Lerner-Winston (Sprague Grayden) is Opie's first wife and the mother of his two children. She doesn't trust SAMCRO after Opie serves extensive jail time for the club. She is mistakenly murdered by Tig in the Season 1 finale.
 Kerrianne Larkin-Telford (Q'orianka Kilcher) is the teenage daughter of Chibs Telford and Fiona Larkin, raised by Fiona and Jimmy O'Phelan.
 Abel Teller (Ryder and Evan Londo) is the son of Jax Teller and Wendy Case. Abel was hospitalized as a newborn due to his premature birth and his mother's drug usage. He was kidnapped by Cameron Hayes in the season 2 finale episode Na Triobloidi, then was put into an adoption of where he was adopted by a catholic Irish family. Jax gets Abel back from the family after they were murdered.
 Thomas 'Tommy' Teller (multiple actors) is the son of Jax Teller and Tara Knowles. The younger half-brother of Abel Teller, Thomas is named after Jax's brother and Gemma's second son who died as a child.
 Dawn 'Margeoux' Trager (Rachel Miner) and Fawn Trager (Lexi Sakowitz) are the daughters of Alex "Tig" Trager and his ex-wife Colleen. Dawn first appears in the episode "With An X." Dawn is burned to death in the season 5 episode Authority Vested in front of Tig by Damon Pope as retaliation for Tig killing his daughter.
 Ellie and Kenny Winston (Lela Jane Cortines and John Abendroth) are the daughter and son of Opie and Donna Winston.
 Agent Estevez (Marcos de la Cruz) is an agent of the Department of Justice, working under Agent Stahl to bring SAMCRO down.
 Deputy David Hale (Taylor Sheridan) is the deputy chief of the Charming Police Department. Chief Unser nicknames him "Captain America" for his black-and-white views and squeaky clean image (prior to his involvement with L.O.A.N. and sexual encounter with an ATF agent), adherence to the law and, possibly, because of his square-jawed all-American looks. Hale is murdered at Half-Sack's wake while trying to stop the van of shooters.
 Lieutenant Althea Jarry (Annabeth Gish) is the Lieutenant of the San Joaquin Sheriff Department, who is sent to replace the late Eli Roosevelt after his murder. Unser becomes her consultant and helps out in Tara's murder case. Jarry is also shown to have an attraction to SAMCRO member Chibs Telford, which is mutual as they are shown kissing and even sleeping together. She accepts bribe money from the club as a means to earn their trust and establish a working relationship.
 Agent Joshua 'Josh' Kohn (Jay Karnes) is a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives agent pretending to investigate SAMCRO. He and Dr. Tara Knowles dated in Chicago until he became threatening and she obtained a restraining order against him. He later stalks Tara in Charming becoming increasingly violent and unhinged. This culminates in him trying to rape Tara, who shoots him in the gut. Tara calls Jax because she doesn't know what to do with the bleeding out Kohn, and when he insults Tara, Jax kills him. The Santa Rosa Press Democrat called the character "terrifically creepy."[24]
 Agent Grad Nicholas (David Rees Snell) is an FBI agent assigned to investigate the SAMCRO's arms trafficking business. He works closely with Assistant U.S. Attorney Lincoln Potter, often by his side during various points in the investigation. The character's name is a reference to FX network executive Nicholas Grad.
 District Attorney Tyne Patterson (C. C. H. Pounder) is the San Joaquin County District Attorney from Stockton assigned to aggressively address the violence plaguing Charming, specifically from a school shooting resulting in the deaths of four children using a gun acquired from the Sons of Anarchy motorcycle club. To do so, she works with former U.S. Marshal Lee Toric to investigate the Sons.
 Lincoln 'Linc' Potter (Ray McKinnon), who in Season 4, episode 2 says he is a Modesto, California native, an eccentric, manipulative assistant U.S. attorney operating out of Charming in season 4 and the head of a joint agency task force targeting the Sons of Anarchy's arms trafficking business under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, as well as the Real IRA and the Galindo cartel. He rides a motorcycle, dresses like a biker, and somewhat resembles John Teller, which causes Gemma to ask Lincoln if she knows him. Lincoln disapproves of Hale's conflict of interest as both a real estate developer and local government representative, and in the Season 4 finale produces evidence at the Charming city council meeting about Hale's investor that kiboshes Hale's proposed luxury real estate project.
 Lieutenant Eli Roosevelt (Rockmond Dunbar) is a member of the San Joaquin County Sheriff's Department and the head of Charming's law enforcement following the dissolution of the Charming Police Department. Prior to his assignment in Charming, he spent 15 years in Oakland working as part of an anti-gang task force. In the Season 6 finale, Eli finds Tara's corpse and, while he's chastising Gemma, Juice shoots him dead to protect Gemma. In Season 4, episode 2 Eli's wife is shown to have fertility problems, and in later episodes that season she helps Gemma, who visits her flower shop for assistance with wilting plants, successfully solicits a $5,000 "Gold Circle Club" donation from Gemma (donated in Tara's name), and receives a $75,000 joint donation from Clay and Oswalt, to save the community garden where Gemma's father taught Gemma to plant seeds. Later in the series Eli's wife is murdered by men Clay hired to scare the town.
 Agent Smith (Derwin Jordan) is Agent Stahl's ATF partner during the first season.
 Agent June Stahl (Ally Walker) is an ATF agent investigating the club's involvement in arms trafficking after Deputy Chief Hale calls in the ATF in retaliation when Chief Unser does not retire as previously expected. Stahl is responsible for the death of Donna Winston, Opie's wife, when she frames him as a rat to Clay. Later Stahl attempts to frame Chibs. Stahl and Jax make an agreement to get Gemma out of her charges, (that happened when Stahl framed her murder) and for a lighter sentence for the members of SAMCRO. Stahl is killed at the end of season 3, by Opie who tells her, "put your hands on the wheel. This is what she felt", referring to the moment his wife (who Tig thought was Opie) was mistakenly gunned down and shot in the back of the head, all because of her lies in framing Opie as a rat to Clay.
 Sheriff Victor 'Vic' Trammel (Glenn Plummer) was the local sheriff, and an ally of SAMCRO. A close friend of his is murdered by survivalists using guns provided by the Sons, prompting Vic to seriously question his ties to the club.
 Amy Tyler (Pamela J. Gray) is an ATF agent who is both June Stahl's professional and personal partner during the third season.
 Lee Toric (Donal Logue) is a former U.S. Marshal forced into retirement for a variety of reasons, including excessive use of force and racial profiling. It is also mentioned that Toric served in the U.S. Army Special Forces prior to his Marshal service. His only family is his sister Pamela Toric, who works as a nurse at Stockton prison's infirmary. When she is killed by former SAMCRO member Otto Delaney to end the RICO case facing the club, Toric vows revenge. Toric has Otto repeatedly beaten up and raped in prison, hoping to force him into confessing against SAMCRO (as well as satisfying his vengeance for Pamela) and even takes Clay to see the injured Otto in the prison infirmary, though Clay slips Otto a shiv. Believing his tactics are working and he has convinced Otto to bring down SAMCRO, he instead finds a vulgar message about Pamela written on the notepad, prompting him to attack Otto. Otto stabs him multiple times with the shiv and finally slits his throat as the prison guards arrive.
 Charles 'Charlie' Barosky (Peter Weller) is a corrupt former police officer who still has ties with the local police agency and controls rackets in Stockton. He makes numerous deals with people to provide police protection for money. His main operation center is a bakery he owns in Stockton.
 Father Kellan Ashby (James Cosmo) is the consigliere of the Real IRA in Belfast.
 Maureen Ashby (Paula Malcomson) is the widow of Keith McGee. She has ties to the SOA through her late husband and ties to the Real IRA through her older brother, Father Kellan Ashby.
 Trinity Ashby (Zoe Boyle) is Maureen Ashby's adult daughter and McGee's stepdaughter. Her mother Maureen was 18 when she gave birth to Trinity, who is unaware that John Teller, the founder of the Sons of Anarchy, was her real father, and therefore, Jackson (Jax) Teller her half-brother, And Thomas Teller would be her half brother too. 
 She is also the aunt of Thomas and Abel.
 Declan Brogan (Bart McCarthy), Peter Dooley (Paul Collins) and Brendan Roarke (Bob McCracken) are the council of the Real IRA in Belfast. First seen thanking SAMCRO for proving Jimmy O. to have gone rogue, they later propose developing the relationship between the Sons and True IRA even further.
 Brothers Sean and Michael Casey (Dan Hildebrand and Glenn Keogh) are members of the Real IRA in Belfast, and very close to Father Ashby. Maureen Ashby describes them as "being like sons to him." Following Father Ashby's order, they kill Cameron Hayes and dispose of his body. Michael is slain by Jimmy O., who attacks Maureen Ashby's home when the SOA are on a protection run in the episode "Turas".
 Donny (Joel Tobeck) is Jimmy's right-hand man in Belfast. He is a man of reason that tries to keep Jimmy's wild tendencies under control. He successfully tortures Sean Casey for information about Abel Teller.
 Cameron Hayes (Jamie McShane) is McKeavey's cousin and a member of the Real IRA. He becomes SAMCRO's new contact and gun runner after McKeavey's death. Cameron gives back the $200,000 SAMCRO paid for a gun shipment in addition to a month of free guns, as payment for killing Oakland Port Authority Commissioner Brenan Hefner.
 Edmond Hayes (Callard Harris) is Cameron Hayes' son and business partner. He is from South Armagh. Throughout Season 2, he has as much clout in the business as his father, often making deals and judgment calls on his own. Edmond becomes a rat and is later killed by Agent June Stahl when he starts to run, after punching her in abdomen when she says his father, "da raised an Irish pussy". Edmond's death is framed on Gemma, by Agent Stahl, after she follows Polly inside, and kills her in self-defense, just after Stahl kills Edmond.
 Michael McKeavey (Kevin Chapman) is a powerful member of the True IRA who serves as SAMCRO's contact and helps sell illegal weapons through the Sons of Anarchy. His date of birth was April 1, 1966. McKeavey is an old friend to SAMCRO members, including Clay and Piney.
 Luke Moran (Kevin P. Kearns) is Jimmy O.'s second in command in the U.S., and he is glad to follow his boss' every order. When Jax finds out that Jimmy has been lying to him about Abel's whereabouts, he kidnaps Luke and delivers him to Agent June Stahl as part of his deal with her.
 James 'Jimmy O' O'Phelan (Titus Welliver) is the leader of the Real IRA group who sells guns to SAMCRO. Jimmy O. makes his first appearance in season 2 to personally rectify the Hayes' betrayal of SAMCRO, since the Real IRA has long been dependent on the Sons Of Anarchy's Belfast chapter. Jimmy is generally regarded as Chibs Telford's archenemy. When the real IRA have proof of him going behind their backs, he takes Jax's son, Abel, to exchange for a safe passage back to the US. After a long hunt and search, SAMCRO finds out the Russians are hiding him. SAMCRO makes a deal to hand Jimmy over to them. When Agent Stahl gets custody of Jimmy from SAMCRO, Chief Unser pulls them over with a ruse about Jimmy's members waiting ahead in a road block for them. With Stahl's other agents gone, Chibs and a few other members of SAMCRO show up by bus. Chibs pulls Jimmy O. out of the car and slices his mouth, (in the same manner as Jimmy did him years before) and then stabs him to death.
 Galen O'Shay (Timothy V. Murphy) is a high-ranking member of the Real IRA, directly involved in SAMCRO's affairs with the Galindo Cartel. He views Jax as impulsive and reckless following an incident stateside and holds him responsible for the death of Father Kellan Ashby. Cutthroat, stubborn, and ruthless, Galen has no remorse for killing anybody who gets in the way of his business arrangements; for example, he has two members of SAMCRO killed to simply send a message after Jax announces his intention to move away from the gun business. Upon breaking Clay out of prison, Galen is shot dead by Jax.
 Esai Alvarez (Kevin Alejandro) is a member of the Mayans Motorcycle Club and the son of Marcus Alvarez. Marcus selects his son to perform hits on both the Nords' leader Ernest Darby and SAMCRO leader Clay Morrow, but Esai and his men botch both hits. Esai was killed by Happy (with his father's approval) shortly afterwards, in a deal to achieve peace with the Nords and SAMCRO.
 Lander Jackson (Marcello Thedford) is the vice president of the Grim Bastards Motorcycle Club. He and T.O. had been childhood friends, since age four. He is brutally killed by Edgar, the Sergeant-at-Arms of the rival Calaveras Motorcycle Club; T.O. later kills Edgar in revenge.
 Roscoe (Joseph Julian Soria) is a member of the Calaveras Motorcycle Club Lodi chapter. He is appointed the new president by Marcus Álvarez, following the removal of Hector Salazar.
 Hector Salazar (Jose Pablo Cantillo) is the former president of the Lodi chapter of the Calaveras Motorcycle Club, a low-ranking club that does dirty work for the Mayans. The Calaveras perform the drive-by at Half-Sack's wake. He kidnaps Tara and Margaret Murphy and holds them hostage in his aunt's house. This eventually leads to his death by Jax Teller.
 James 'Jimmy' Cacuzza (Jeff Wincott) is the boss of a  Mafia family and a friend of Clay's. He and his crew buy weapons from SAMCRO. When the Mayans and Nords blow up SAMCRO's warehouse, delaying SAMCRO's delivery of one of the weapons shipments, SAMCRO hijacks one of Unser's trucks and gives the contents to the Mafia, taking only a 10% return, as a goodwill gesture.
 Ernest Darby (Mitch Pileggi) is the head of the Nordics (also known as "Nords"), a white supremacist gang mainly involved in meth trafficking. Darby colludes, at various points, with Alvarez, L.O.A.N., and Hale to discredit and eliminate SAMCRO, to bring drugs into Charming, and to burn down CaraCara. He also, initially, accepts money from Hale to persuade Lumpy to sell his boxing club but refuses to use violence and returns the money.
 Henry Lin (Kenneth Choi) was the Chinese-American leader of an Oakland-based Triad. His gang is after a man named Chuck Marstein, who was a bookkeeper for their illegal businesses but eventually stole from them. In season 7, he was killed by Juice.
 Nate Meineke (Tim De Zarn) is the leader of a local state militia and terrorist group. He served in Vietnam alongside Piney Winston. He and his son, Russell Meineke (James Harvey Ward), buy weapons from SAMCRO and use them to ambush a prison convoy to free one of their members. They plan to go into hiding in Mexico. However, the Sons of Anarchy kill them by bombing their hideout bunker, as they had brought heat onto SAMCRO with the shootings.
 
 Romero 'Romeo' Parada (Danny Trejo) is a high-ranking member of the Galindo drug cartel, who has connections to Marcus Alvarez and the Mayans. He is a former Mexican commando that was enlisted by José Galindo to head up the cartel's strategic enforcement unit. At the end of season 4 it is revealed that he and his lieutenant Luis Torres are NCS members working with the CIA to take down rival drug cartels and thus control the Mexican drug trade and stabilize Mexico. Parada and the CIA shut down the RICO case against SAMCRO at the end of season 4 and force Jax to take over leadership of SAMCRO and keep Clay alive to continue the gunrunning operation.
 Damon Pope (Harold Perrineau) is first mentioned in season 4's finale as the most dangerous gangster in Oakland. A powerful businessman, Damon Pope is also a bloodthirsty, ruthless, and calculating individual who wields influence over many black gangs. He does not hesitate to use extreme violence to demonstrate his power or to make things go his way. After Tig inadvertently kills Pope's daughter by hitting her with a car aimed at Laroy, Pope orders his henchmen to burn one of Tig's daughters alive in front of her father. Later, Pope forces SAMCRO to work for him; however, Jax eventually outsmarts him and tricks Pope to meet in a remote area by promising to give up Tig, whom at Jax's request, Pope agreed to delay killing. After killing Pope's guards who did not expect an attack, Jax gives a gun to Tig, who shoots Pope in the head.
 August Marks (Billy Brown), introduced in season 5, is Damon Pope's right-hand man. Like Pope, Marks projects a courteous and friendly front, but is also extremely ruthless. He states he has been working for Pope since he was 17. He also tells Jax what separates him from Pope is that "Damon made his name on the streets by being the smartest. I (August) made mine by being the deadliest." In the series finale, Jax shoots him dead in revenge for Bobby's murder.
 Viktor Putlova (Keith Szarabajka) the head of the  Russian Mafia in Northern California and Oregon. An old acquaintance of Jimmy O.'s, Putlova is hired by Jimmy to help him escape the Real IRA and SAMCRO. However, Putlova betrays Jimmy and makes a deal with SAMCRO to hand over Jimmy in exchange for $2 million.
 Luis Torres (Benito Martinez) is Romeo Parada's chief lieutenant in the Jose Galindo drug cartel. He is often at Romeo's side. He is a former lieutenant first class in the Mexican Special Forces Airmobile Group and Intelligence. He has a master's degree in logistics from Universidad Veracruzana. Parada was his commanding officer and Torres left Special Forces two weeks after Parada left. Torres' last known tour of duty was fighting the Galindo Cartel. Like Parada, Torres was recruited into NCS working with the CIA to fight rival drug cartels and thus control the Mexican drug trade and stabilize Mexico.
 Ron Tully (Marilyn Manson) is the leader of the Aryan Brotherhood in the Stockton, California area. He is currently incarcerated in Stockton State prison, where he has great influence as many guards are on his payroll. He becomes an ally to Jax and SAMCRO in season 7, after Jax viciously beats an AB rat and brings Tully two of the rat's teeth. Tully develops a sexual interest in Juice, who gets himself arrested purposely so he can kill Lin, after which Tully is charged by SAMCRO to assassinate Juice.
 Ule (Jason Matthew Smith) is a member of the League of American Nationals (L.O.A.N.). He has an antagonistic and distrustful relationship with A.J. Weston, and believes that, as Zobelle's right-hand man, Weston's ardent white supremacist beliefs are not allowing L.O.A.N. to broaden their horizons. Gradually, Ule takes Weston's place in L.O.A.N.'s covert activities with the Mayans. When A.J. Weston finds out about the drug trade with the Mayans, he kills the female heroin cookers and executes Ule.
 Laroy Wayne (Tory Kittles) is SAMCRO's contact in the One-Niners street gang and the gang's leader. Laroy buys weapons from SAMCRO and is often in the company of a man with a burned face called Gill (E.R. Ruiz), possibly his second in command. The fictional One-Niners gang also appears in The Shield. Laroy ends up dead when his body ends up in Damon Pope's fire pit that Tig is made to watch go up in flames, as it also contains his daughter, Dawn, as retaliation for the death of Pope's daughter.
 A.J. Weston (Henry Rollins) is the muscle, or street leader, of the League of American Nationalists (also known as "L.O.A.N."), a white separatist gang trying to gain control in Charming and force SAMCRO out. A lieutenant and right-hand man of Ethan Zobelle, A.J is an extremely violent ex-convict and ardent white supremacist, albeit also being a loving single father of two young sons, Cliff and Duke. Zobelle and Weston threaten SAMCRO' 's President, Clay Morrow, but when he proves impossible to intimidate, Weston and two other Aryans wearing rubber masks kidnap his wife, Gemma Teller Morrow. They chain her to a fence, beat her, and gang rape her. Weston is eventually killed when SAMCRO ambushes him the bathroom of a tattoo parlor. Weston's son Cliff is present, but Weston convinces Jax teller to allow the child to leave before Jax shoots Weston six times with a silenced pistol, killing him.
 IGN gave the second season an 8.4/10 rating, giving praise to Henry Rollins' character, AJ Weston, saying, "A decidedly stronger second season sees the gang unravel and knit back together."[25] His death was voted #2 on IGN's list of Sons of Anarchy's Best Deaths ahead of the airing of the show's third season.[26]
 Ethan Zobelle (Adam Arkin) is the head of the League of American Nationalists ("L.O.A.N."), a white separatist gang who desires to gain a foothold in Charming and force SAMCRO out. Zobelle moved into Charming and presented himself to the townspeople and local law enforcement as the owner of the newly opened Impeccable Smokes cigar shop on the town's Main Street. Zobelle presented himself to Deputy Chief David Hale as being a means to get SAMCRO out of Charming. After Zobelle makes several unsuccessful attempts to remove SAMCRO from Charming, SAMCRO bikers convince Zobelle's right-hand man A.J. Weston that Zobelle was working behind the brotherhood's back by dealing in the gun and heroin trades with the Mayans. It is eventually revealed Zobelle is an F.B.I. informant, and he and his daughter Polly attempt to flee to Budapest. Polly is killed, but Zobelle escapes, and is last seen booking a flight out of a small private airport.
 Polly Zobelle (Sarah Jones) is the scheming daughter and accomplice of Ethan Zobelle. She is the one who initially tricks and subdues Gemma prior to her rape. She also rigs the car bomb which nearly kills Chibs. Deputy Hale extorts her to get information about her father's whereabouts, but she feeds him partially false information, which has extreme repercussions for SAMCRO. She is shot dead by Gemma in retaliation for having her raped.

 The first season of the American television drama series Sons of Anarchy premiered on September 3, 2008, and concluded on November 26, 2008, after 13 episodes aired on cable network FX. It is also the only season to air on Wednesdays before the show moved to Tuesdays for the remainder of its run. Created by Kurt Sutter, it is about the lives of a close-knit outlaw motorcycle club operating in Charming, a fictional town in California's Central Valley. The show centers on protagonist Jackson "Jax" Teller (Charlie Hunnam), the vice president of the motorcycle club, who begins questioning the club and himself.
 Sons of Anarchy is the story of the Teller-Morrow family of Charming, California, as well as other members of the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club, Redwood Original (SAMCRO), their families, various Charming townspeople, allied and rival gangs, associates, and law agencies that undermine or support SAMCRO's legal and illegal enterprises.
 The series begins with the destruction of a warehouse the club uses to store and assemble guns, which is their main source of income, by a rival MC right before the overdose of Jax's Methamphetamine-addicted, pregnant ex-wife Wendy. An emergency C-section is performed, and their son Abel is delivered ten weeks prematurely. Jax finds his father's memoirs when he visits a storage unit to collect some old baby clothes. John Teller, Jax's father, was one of the founders of SAMCRO, and the book describes his trials with and hopes for the club. Jax's mother, Gemma Teller-Morrow, is now married to the President of SAMCRO, Clay Morrow. Jax's best friend Opie has just been released from prison for serving time for a club-related crime. The first season deals with Jax trying to reconcile things happening to the club with what he reads in his father's memoirs, Opie trying to take a lesser role in the club, and local and federal law enforcement trying to shut down SAMCRO.
 The first season received generally positive reviews from industry critics. Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe said the first season had "real potential".[1] The New York Times’ Gina Bellafante spoke highly of the cast's acting ability, particularly Sagal’s portrayal of Gemma. Brian Lowry of Variety gave a mixed review, admiring Sutter’s creation of the club and the town of Charming but observing the early episodes lacked direction.[2]
 On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the season has an approval rating of 88% based on 24 reviews. The site's critical consensus reads: "Rough and harsh, Sons of Anarchy features one of television's best ensemble casts."[citation needed]
 Although Sons of Anarchy is set in Northern California's Central Valley, it is filmed primarily at Occidental Studios Stage 5A in North Hollywood. Main sets located there include the clubhouse, St. Thomas Hospital, and Jax's house. The production rooms at the studio used by the writing staff also double as the Charming police station. External scenes are often filmed nearby in Sun Valley and Tujunga.[3] Interior and exterior scenes set in Northern Ireland during season 3 were also filmed at Occidental Studios and surrounding areas. A second unit shot footage in Northern Ireland used in the third season.[4]
 Originally, Scott Glenn was cast in the role of Clay Morrow and an entire pilot episode was filmed with him. However, series creator Kurt Sutter decided to go in a different direction with the character and re-cast Ron Perlman in the role, and Clay's scenes were re-shot.[5] Additionally, Emilio Rivera was originally cast as a Sons of Anarchy club member named "Hawk," who eventually evolved into the character of Tig Trager.[6] Also, the One-Niners street gang who buy weapons from SAMCRO first appeared in The Shield, which Sutter produced.
 The first season was released in the United States on DVD and Blu-ray on August 18, 2009.
Anarchy is the state of a society being freely constituted without authorities or a governing body.
 Anarchy may also refer to:
Relationship anarchy (sometimes abbreviated RA) is the application of anarchist principles to intimate relationships. Its values include autonomy, anti-hierarchical practices, anti-normativity, and community interdependence.[1][2][3][4] RA is explicitly anti-amatonormative[5] and anti-mononormative and is commonly, but not always, non-monogamous.[3][6][7] This is distinct from polyamory, solo poly, swinging, and other forms of “dating”, which may include structures such as amatonormativity, hierarchy of intimate relationships, and autonomy-limiting rules.[2][6][8] It has also been interpreted as a new paradigm in which closeness and autonomy are no longer considered to create dilemmas within a relationship.[9]
 Andie Nordgren popularized the term "relationship anarchy"[2][3][7] in her 2012 Tumblr essay "The short instructional manifesto for relationship anarchy",[10] which she translated from her own Swedish-language "Relationsanarki i 8 punkter" (lit. Relationship anarchy in 8 points).[11] Other relevant writings exploring this topic within a similar time frame include "A Green Anarchist Project on Freedom and Love" and "Against the Couple Form".[12]
 Workshops at OpenCon 2010 discussed relationship anarchy,[13] and the Open University professor Dr. Meg Barker discussed it in a 2013 presentation.[14] In the International Non-Monogamies and Contemporary Intimacies Conferences, since 2016, different aspects of relationship anarchy have been studied.[15][16] In March 2020, the first book dedicated monographically to relationship anarchy was published in Spanish  "Anarquía Relacional. La revolución desde los vínculos",[17] translated into English in 2022 as "Relationship Anarchy. Occupy Intimacy"[18]
 The general press has dealt with relationship anarchy in articles with different approaches and scopes. In 2021, Cosmopolitan magazine[19] describes it as a distinct relational style, remarking on the importance it assigns to needs, boundaries and expectations, and quoting experts such as Dr. Heath Schechinger, co-chair of the American Psychological Association Division 44 Committee on Consensual Non-Monogamy and other authors and practitioners. In April 13, 2022, an article in Men's Health magazine[20] emphasizes how to put the philosophy of relationship anarchy into practice and how it leads us not to hierarchize between platonic and romantic relationships. It even extends that to deeply loving relationships with non-humans: the environment, pets, God or spirituality, art, music, or even football clubs.
 In June 17, 2022, an article in The New York Times[21] stated that The Organization for Polyamory and Ethical Non-monogamy, or OPEN, sent an open letter to Meta calling for Facebook to allow users to list more than one relationship status in their profiles, including “Polyamory,” “Swinging,” and “Relationship Anarchy". In February 8, 2023, The Observer, in the article "We Can All Learn From Polyamory",[22] the nine statements that make up the relationship anarchy manifesto are proposed as pillars of any type relationship. It is compared to polyamory that is said to fall under the umbrella of ethical non-monogamy, identified as the set of all nontraditional connections made between more than two people. Relationship anarchy is regarded as more of a philosophy, comprising values that encourage people to form relationships based on their own wants and needs rather than traditional social rules.

 The Purge: Anarchy is a 2014 American dystopian action horror film written and directed by James DeMonaco. A sequel to 2013's The Purge and the second installment in the Purge franchise, the film stars Frank Grillo, Carmen Ejogo, Zach Gilford, Kiele Sanchez, and Michael K. Williams. Edwin Hodge reprised his role from the first film. It was released worldwide on July 18, 2014.
 The film grossed over $111 million and received mixed reviews from critics, who praised it as an improvement over its predecessor, but criticized its clichéd formula and screenplay. While the first film was set largely in one house, Anarchy takes place around the Greater Los Angeles area and shows more of what happens to the surroundings during the event. A third film in the series, The Purge: Election Year, was released on July 1, 2016.
 A dystopian United States, ruled by a totalitarian government known as the New Founding Fathers of America (NFFA), is preparing for the annual Purge, a 12-hour event that legalizes all crimes without authorities. However, anti-Purge resistance group led by partners Carmelo Johns and Dante Bishop hijack government feeds to denounce the New Founding Fathers and their actions.
 In Los Angeles, working-class waitress Eva Sanchez returns home to her daughter Cali and terminally ill father Rico. As Eva and Cali prepare to barricade themselves into their apartment, Rico retires to his room to be alone as the Purge starts. Just as the Purge starts, Rico slips out to a waiting limousine; it was revealed he has offered himself to be killed by a rich family in exchange for money paid to Eva and Cali.
 Estranged married couple Shane and Liz visit a grocery store, only to be harassed by a masked gang of skateboarders and dirt bikers. As they drive away, their car breaks down, having been tampered with by the biker gang. 
 Off-duty LAPD sergeant Leo Barnes plots to kill Warren Grass. The day before the previous year's Purge[a], Grass struck Leo's son Nicholas while driving drunk, but was acquitted due to Nicholas dying on Purge night. Ignoring his ex-wife Janice's pleas, Leo loads up his armored car with several weapons and drives out into the streets.
 As Shane and Liz try to find a safe hiding place, the Purge commences. Eva and Cali notice NFFA paramilitary amassing in the street below, and the superintendent, Diego, enters her apartment. Diego is gunned down by a paramilitary platoon, which captures the women to offer them to their leader, Big Daddy, for his own personal purge. Leo passes by and rescues Eva and Cali after killing the troops and wounding Big Daddy. They find Shane and Liz hiding in Leo's car. The group flees just as Big Daddy fires at them, damaging the vehicle. After Leo's car breaks down, the group flees on foot.
 As the group navigates the hostile streets, they find a paramilitary van surrounded by soldiers who were shot to death by the resistance fighters. After freeing Shane from a trap and taking guns from the abandoned truck, they head to the subways. Pyrotechnic Purging gang invades the subways and sets the tunnel ablaze. Shane is wounded, but the group manages to escape after he and Liz destroy the gang's all-terrain vehicle and its propane tank with the salvaged guns.
 The group returns to the streets, but as they near Tanya's apartment building, Eva unknowingly signals a traffic camera to identify them to the paramilitary troops who pick up the apartment's location. They reach Tanya's house, and Tanya's family takes them in, offering dinner and medicine. However, Tanya's sister Lorraine murders her sister for sleeping with her husband. The group leaves the family, only to be captured by the masked gang who ambushed Shane and Liz earlier. The gang sells them off to an auction, taking them to a theater where upper-class Purgers bid on them for human hunting. 
 After the group is forced into the arena, Leo subdues and kills a Purger, taking his weapon and night vision device, overpowering and killing several other attackers, and providing their arms to Shane and the others before the head Purger calls in security. Shane is shot and killed by security forces. The anti-Purge group attacks the compound, killing the security forces and remaining Purgers; Liz chooses to stay with the resistance fighters, while Leo, Eva, and Cali leave. Leo steals a car and drives off with Eva and Cali
 Leo, Eva, and Cali drive up to a suburban neighborhood and stop at the home of Warren Grass. Leo ventures into the house despite Eva and Cali's pleas to abandon his revenge, threatening Warren and his wife. As Leo exits the house, he is shot by Big Daddy. He reveals that the New Founding Fathers have been secretly dispatched death squads to increase the body count because the purge has been eliminating too few people of the lower class. Just as Big Daddy is about to kill Leo, Warren appears and kills Big Daddy, revealing that Leo chose to forgive and spare him. As Big Daddy's death squad appears while Eva, Cali, and Warren prepare to defend themselves, sirens blare to signal the end of the purge (making Big Daddy's death legal and sparing Leo). Warren drives Eva, Cali, and Leo to the hospital as news and police helicopters fly over the city.
 Tyler Osterkamp	and Nathan Clarkson reprise their roles as Freak Purgers from The Purge in an uncredited capacity, while archive footage of Ethan Hawke, Rhys Wakefield, and Alicia Vela-Bailey as James Sandin, Polite Leader and the Blonde Female Freak Purger from The Purge is also shown over the end credits.
 On June 10, 2013, Universal Pictures and Jason Blum announced the development of the sequel, after the success of The Purge.[8] Initially a release date was set for June 20, 2014,[9] although this was later pushed back to July 18.[10] Principal photography was underway in Los Angeles when Blumhouse Productions released their countdown promo art on January 1, 2014.[11] Filming wrapped on February 10, 2014.[12]
 The Purge: Anarchy was released on Blu-ray, DVD, and Digital on October 21, 2014.[13] The film was released on 4K UHD Blu-Ray on June 12, 2018.[14] It grossed $12 million in home video sales.[15]
 The Purge: Anarchy grossed $72 million in America and $40 million in other countries for a total gross of $111.9 million, against a budget of $9 million.[3]
 The film was released in North America in 3,303 theaters,[16] and earned $2.6 million in its first night.[17] In its opening weekend, the film grossed $29.8 million, finishing in second place behind the continued run of Dawn of the Planet of the Apes. This was about $4 million less than the opening of the original film ($34 million).[18]
 On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 58% based on 144 reviews, with an average rating of 5.40/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "Gritty, grisly, and uncommonly ambitious, The Purge: Anarchy represents a slight improvement over its predecessor, but it's still never as smart or resonant as it tries to be."[19] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score 50 out of 100, based on 32 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[20] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.[21]
 A third film in the series titled The Purge: Election Year was released on July 1, 2016.
 The film was the theme for a scare zone in the 2014 edition of Halloween Horror Nights at two of the Universal Parks & Resorts. It was also a house at Halloween Horror Nights the following year in Orlando while Hollywood received a scare zone and being the main theme of Terror Tram.[citation needed]
